<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-10" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Jupiter, calling a council of the gods, forbids them to engage in either party. At Aeneas’ return there is a bloody battle: Turnus killing Pallas; Aeneas, Lausus, and Mezentius. Mezentius is described as an atheist; Lausus as a pious and virtuous youth. The different actions and death of these two are the subject of a noble episode.</p>
			</header>
			<p>
				<span>The gates of heav’n unfold: Jove summons all</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods to council in the common hall.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sublimely seated, he surveys from far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fields, the camp, the fortune of the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all th’ inferior world. From first to last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sov’reign senate in degrees are plac’d.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then thus th’ almighty sire began: “Ye gods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Natives or denizens of blest abodes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From whence these murmurs, and this change of mind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This backward fate from what was first design’d?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why this protracted war, when my commands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pronounc’d a peace, and gave the Latian lands?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What fear or hope on either part divides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our heav’ns, and arms our powers on diff’rent sides?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lawful time of war at length will come,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Nor need your haste anticipate the doom),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Carthage shall contend the world with Rome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall force the rigid rocks and Alpine chains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, like a flood, come pouring on the plains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then is your time for faction and debate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For partial favour, and permitted hate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let now your immature dissension cease;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sit quiet, and compose your souls to peace.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus Jupiter in few unfolds the charge;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But lovely Venus thus replies at large:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O pow’r immense, eternal energy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(For to what else protection can we fly?)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seest thou the proud Rutulians, how they dare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In fields, unpunish’d, and insult my care?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How lofty Turnus vaunts amidst his train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In shining arms, triumphant on the plain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ev’n in their lines and trenches they contend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And scarce their walls the Trojan troops defend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The town is fill’d with slaughter, and o’erfloats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a red deluge, their increasing moats.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas, ignorant, and far from thence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has left a camp expos’d, without defence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This endless outrage shall they still sustain?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall Troy renew’d be forc’d and fir’d again?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A second siege my banish’d issue fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a new Diomede in arms appears.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One more audacious mortal will be found;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I, thy daughter, wait another wound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, if with fates averse, without thy leave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Latian lands my progeny receive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear they the pains of violated law,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy protection from their aid withdraw.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, if the gods their sure success foretell;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If those of heav’n consent with those of hell,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To promise Italy; who dare debate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pow’r of Jove, or fix another fate?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What should I tell of tempests on the main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Aeolus usurping Neptune’s reign?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Iris sent, with Bacchanalian heat</span>
				<br/>
				<span>T’ inspire the matrons, and destroy the fleet?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now Juno to the Stygian sky descends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Solicits hell for aid, and arms the fiends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That new example wanted yet above:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An act that well became the wife of Jove!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alecto, rais’d by her, with rage inflames</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The peaceful bosoms of the Latian dames.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imperial sway no more exalts my mind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Such hopes I had indeed, while Heav’n was kind;)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now let my happier foes possess my place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom Jove prefers before the Trojan race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And conquer they, whom you with conquest grace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since you can spare, from all your wide command,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No spot of earth, no hospitable land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which may my wand’ring fugitives receive;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Since haughty Juno will not give you leave;)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, father, (if I still may use that name,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By ruin’d Troy, yet smoking from the flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I beg you, let Ascanius, by my care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be freed from danger, and dismiss’d the war:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inglorious let him live, without a crown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The father may be cast on coasts unknown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struggling with fate; but let me save the son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mine is Cythera, mine the Cyprian tow’rs:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In those recesses, and those sacred bow’rs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Obscurely let him rest; his right resign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To promis’d empire, and his Julian line.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Carthage may th’ Ausonian towns destroy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor fear the race of a rejected boy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What profits it my son to scape the fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arm’d with his gods, and loaded with his sire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To pass the perils of the seas and wind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evade the Greeks, and leave the war behind;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To reach th’ Italian shores; if, after all,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our second Pergamus is doom’d to fall?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much better had he curb’d his high desires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hover’d o’er his ill-extinguish’d fires.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Simoïs’ banks the fugitives restore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give them back to war, and all the woes before.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Deep indignation swell’d Saturnia’s heart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And must I own,” she said, “my secret smart⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What with more decence were in silence kept,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, but for this unjust reproach, had slept?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did god or man your fav’rite son advise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With war unhop’d the Latians to surprise?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By fate, you boast, and by the gods’ decree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He left his native land for Italy!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Confess the truth; by mad Cassandra, more</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than Heav’n inspir’d, he sought a foreign shore!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did I persuade to trust his second Troy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the raw conduct of a beardless boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With walls unfinish’d, which himself forsakes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thro’ the waves a wand’ring voyage takes?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When have I urg’d him meanly to demand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Tuscan aid, and arm a quiet land?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did I or Iris give this mad advice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or made the fool himself the fatal choice?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You think it hard, the Latians should destroy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With swords your Trojans, and with fires your Troy!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard and unjust indeed, for men to draw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their native air, nor take a foreign law!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Turnus is permitted still to live,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom his birth a god and goddess give!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But yet is just and lawful for your line</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To drive their fields, and force with fraud to join;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Realms, not your own, among your clans divide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from the bridegroom tear the promis’d bride;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Petition, while you public arms prepare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pretend a peace, and yet provoke a war!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas giv’n to you, your darling son to shroud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To draw the dastard from the fighting crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, for a man, obtend an empty cloud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From flaming fleets you turn’d the fire away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chang’d the ships to daughters of the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But is my crime⁠—the Queen of Heav’n offends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If she presume to save her suff’ring friends!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your son, not knowing what his foes decree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You say, is absent: absent let him be.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yours is Cythera, yours the Cyprian tow’rs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soft recesses, and the sacred bow’rs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why do you then these needless arms prepare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus provoke a people prone to war?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did I with fire the Trojan town deface,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hinder from return your exil’d race?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was I the cause of mischief, or the man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose lawless lust the fatal war began?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Think on whose faith th’ adult’rous youth relied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who promis’d, who procur’d, the Spartan bride?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When all th’ united states of Greece combin’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To purge the world of the perfidious kind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then was your time to fear the Trojan fate:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your quarrels and complaints are now too late.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus Juno. Murmurs rise, with mix’d applause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just as they favour or dislike the cause.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So winds, when yet unfledg’d in woods they lie,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In whispers first their tender voices try,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then issue on the main with bellowing rage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And storms to trembling mariners presage.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then thus to both replied th’ imperial god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who shakes heav’n’s axles with his awful nod.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(When he begins, the silent senate stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With rev’rence, list’ning to the dread command:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clouds dispel; the winds their breath restrain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the hush’d waves lie flatted on the main.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Celestials, your attentive ears incline!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since,” said the god, “the Trojans must not join</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wish’d alliance with the Latian line;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since endless jarrings and immortal hate</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tend but to discompose our happy state;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The war henceforward be resign’d to fate:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each to his proper fortune stand or fall;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Equal and unconcern’d I look on all.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rutulians, Trojans, are the same to me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And both shall draw the lots their fates decree.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let these assault, if Fortune be their friend;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, if she favours those, let those defend:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Fates will find their way.” The Thund’rer said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shook the sacred honours of his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attesting Styx, th’ inviolable flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the black regions of his brother god.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trembled the poles of heav’n, and earth confess’d the nod.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This end the sessions had: the senate rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to his palace wait their sov’reign thro’ the skies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime, intent upon their siege, the foes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within their walls the Trojan host inclose:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They wound, they kill, they watch at ev’ry gate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Renew the fires, and urge their happy fate.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Th’ Aeneans wish in vain their wanted chief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hopeless of flight, more hopeless of relief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thin on the tow’rs they stand; and ev’n those few</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A feeble, fainting, and dejected crew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet in the face of danger some there stood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The two bold brothers of Sarpedon’s blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asius and Acmon; both th’ Assaraci;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young Haemon, and though young, resolv’d to die.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With these were Clarus and Thymoetes join’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tibris and Castor, both of Lycian kind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Acmon’s hands a rolling stone there came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So large, it half deserv’d a mountain’s name:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong-sinew’d was the youth, and big of bone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His brother Mnestheus could not more have done,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the great father of th’ intrepid son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some firebrands throw, some flights of arrows send;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And some with darts, and some with stones defend.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Amid the press appears the beauteous boy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The care of Venus, and the hope of Troy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His lovely face unarm’d, his head was bare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ringlets o’er his shoulders hung his hair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His forehead circled with a diadem;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Distinguish’d from the crowd, he shines a gem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enchas’d in gold, or polish’d iv’ry set,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amidst the meaner foil of sable jet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nor Ismarus was wanting to the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Directing pointed arrows from afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And death with poison arm’d⁠—in Lydia born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where plenteous harvests the fat fields adorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where proud Pactolus floats the fruitful lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And leaves a rich manure of golden sands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There Capys, author of the Capuan name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And there was Mnestheus too, increas’d in fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since Turnus from the camp he cast with shame.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus mortal war was wag’d on either side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime the hero cuts the nightly tide:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, anxious, from Evander when he went,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sought the Tyrrhene camp, and Tarchon’s tent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Expos’d the cause of coming to the chief;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His name and country told, and ask’d relief;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Propos’d the terms; his own small strength declar’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What vengeance proud Mezentius had prepar’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What Turnus, bold and violent, design’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then shew’d the slipp’ry state of humankind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fickle fortune; warn’d him to beware,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to his wholesome counsel added pray’r.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tarchon, without delay, the treaty signs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to the Trojan troops the Tuscan joins.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They soon set sail; nor now the fates withstand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their forces trusted with a foreign hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas leads; upon his stern appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two lions carv’d, which rising Ida bear⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ida, to wand’ring Trojans ever dear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under their grateful shade Aeneas sate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Revolving war’s events, and various fate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His left young Pallas kept, fix’d to his side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And oft of winds enquir’d, and of the tide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oft of the stars, and of their wat’ry way;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And what he suffer’d both by land and sea.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now, sacred sisters, open all your spring!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Tuscan leaders, and their army sing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which follow’d great Aeneas to the war:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their arms, their numbers, and their names declare.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>A thousand youths brave Massicus obey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Borne in the Tiger thro’ the foaming sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Asium brought, and Cosa, by his care:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For arms, light quivers, bows and shafts, they bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fierce Abas next: his men bright armour wore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His stern Apollo’s golden statue bore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Six hundred Populonia sent along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All skill’d in martial exercise, and strong.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three hundred more for battle Ilva joins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An isle renown’d for steel, and unexhausted mines.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asylas on his prow the third appears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who heav’n interprets, and the wand’ring stars;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From offer’d entrails prodigies expounds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And peals of thunder, with presaging sounds.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A thousand spears in warlike order stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent by the Pisans under his command.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Fair Astur follows in the wat’ry field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proud of his manag’d horse and painted shield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gravisca, noisome from the neighb’ring fen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his own Caere, sent three hundred men;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With those which Minio’s fields and Pyrgi gave,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All bred in arms, unanimous, and brave.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thou, Muse, the name of Cinyras renew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And brave Cupavo follow’d but by few;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose helm confess’d the lineage of the man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bore, with wings display’d, a silver swan.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love was the fault of his fam’d ancestry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose forms and fortunes in his ensigns fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Cycnus lov’d unhappy Phaeton,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sung his loss in poplar groves, alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beneath the sister shades, to soothe his grief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heav’n heard his song, and hasten’d his relief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And chang’d to snowy plumes his hoary hair,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wing’d his flight, to chant aloft in air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His son Cupavo brush’d the briny flood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Upon his stern a brawny Centaur stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who heav’d a rock, and, threat’ning still to throw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lifted hands alarm’d the seas below:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They seem’d to fear the formidable sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And roll’d their billows on, to speed his flight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ocnus was next, who led his native train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hardy warriors thro’ the wat’ry plain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Manto by the Tuscan stream,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From whence the Mantuan town derives the name⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>An ancient city, but of mix’d descent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three sev’ral tribes compose the government;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Four towns are under each; but all obey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Mantuan laws, and own the Tuscan sway.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Hate to Mezentius arm’d five hundred more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom Mincius from his sire Benacus bore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mincius, with wreaths of reeds his forehead cover’d o’er.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These grave Auletes leads: a hundred sweep</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With stretching oars at once the glassy deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him and his martial train the Triton bears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High on his poop the sea-green god appears:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frowning he seems his crooked shell to sound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And at the blast the billows dance around.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hairy man above the waist he shows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A porpoise tail beneath his belly grows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ends a fish: his breast the waves divides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And froth and foam augment the murm’ring tides.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Full thirty ships transport the chosen train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Troy’s relief, and scour the briny main.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now was the world forsaken by the sun,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Phoebe half her nightly race had run.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The careful chief, who never clos’d his eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself the rudder holds, the sails supplies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A choir of Nereids meet him on the flood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once his own galleys, hewn from Ida’s wood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But now, as many nymphs, the sea they sweep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As rode, before, tall vessels on the deep.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They know him from afar; and in a ring</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enclose the ship that bore the Trojan king.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cymodoce, whose voice excell’d the rest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the waves advanc’d her snowy breast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her right hand stops the stern; her left divides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The curling ocean, and corrects the tides.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She spoke for all the choir, and thus began</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pleasing words to warn th’ unknowing man:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sleeps our lov’d lord? O goddess-born, awake!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread ev’ry sail, pursue your wat’ry track,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And haste your course. Your navy once were we,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Ida’s height descending to the sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till Turnus, as at anchor fix’d we stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Presum’d to violate our holy wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, loos’d from shore, we fled his fires profane</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Unwillingly we broke our master’s chain),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And since have sought you thro’ the Tuscan main.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The mighty Mother chang’d our forms to these,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And gave us life immortal in the seas.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But young Ascanius, in his camp distress’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By your insulting foes is hardly press’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ Arcadian horsemen, and Etrurian host,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advance in order on the Latian coast:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To cut their way the Daunian chief designs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before their troops can reach the Trojan lines.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou, when the rosy morn restores the light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First arm thy soldiers for th’ ensuing fight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thyself the fated sword of Vulcan wield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bear aloft th’ impenetrable shield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tomorrow’s sun, unless my skill be vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall see huge heaps of foes in battle slain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Parting, she spoke; and with immortal force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Push’d on the vessel in her wat’ry course;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For well she knew the way. Impell’d behind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ship flew forward, and outstripp’d the wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rest make up. Unknowing of the cause,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chief admires their speed, and happy omens draws.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then thus he pray’d, and fix’d on heav’n his eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hear thou, great Mother of the deities.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With turrets crown’d! (on Ida’s holy hill</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fierce tigers, rein’d and curb’d, obey thy will.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Firm thy own omens; lead us on to fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let thy Phrygians conquer in thy right.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He said no more. And now renewing day</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had chas’d the shadows of the night away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He charg’d the soldiers, with preventing care,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their flags to follow, and their arms prepare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warn’d of th’ ensuing fight, and bade ’em hope the war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, his lofty poop, he view’d below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His camp incompass’d, and th’ inclosing foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His blazing shield, imbrac’d, he held on high;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The camp receive the sign, and with loud shouts reply.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hope arms their courage: from their tow’rs they throw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their darts with double force, and drive the foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus, at the signal giv’n, the cranes arise</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Before the stormy south, and blacken all the skies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>King Turnus wonder’d at the fight renew’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, looking back, the Trojan fleet he view’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The seas with swelling canvas cover’d o’er,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the swift ships descending on the shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Latians saw from far, with dazzled eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The radiant crest that seem’d in flames to rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dart diffusive fires around the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the keen glitt’ring of the golden shield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus threat’ning comets, when by night they rise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shoot sanguine streams, and sadden all the skies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Sirius, flashing forth sinister lights,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pale humankind with plagues and with dry famine fright:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Yet Turnus with undaunted mind is bent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To man the shores, and hinder their descent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus awakes the courage of his friends:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What you so long have wish’d, kind Fortune sends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In ardent arms to meet th’ invading foe:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You find, and find him at advantage now.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yours is the day: you need but only dare;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your swords will make you masters of the war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your sires, your sons, your houses, and your lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dearest wifes, are all within your hands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be mindful of the race from whence you came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And emulate in arms your fathers’ fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now take the time, while stagg’ring yet they stand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With feet unfirm, and prepossess the strand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fortune befriends the bold.” Nor more he said,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But balanc’d whom to leave, and whom to lead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then these elects, the landing to prevent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And those he leaves, to keep the city pent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime the Trojan sends his troops ashore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some are by boats expos’d, by bridges more.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With lab’ring oars they bear along the strand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the tide languishes, and leap a-land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tarchon observes the coast with careful eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, where no ford he finds, no water fries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor billows with unequal murmurs roar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But smoothly slide along, and swell the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That course he steer’d, and thus he gave command:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Here ply your oars, and at all hazard land:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Force on the vessel, that her keel may wound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This hated soil, and furrow hostile ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me securely land⁠—I ask no more;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then sink my ships, or shatter on the shore.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>This fiery speech inflames his fearful friends:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They tug at ev’ry oar, and ev’ry stretcher bends;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They run their ships aground; the vessels knock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Thus forc’d ashore,) and tremble with the shock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tarchon’s alone was lost, that stranded stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stuck on a bank, and beaten by the flood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She breaks her back; the loosen’d sides give way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plunge the Tuscan soldiers in the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their broken oars and floating planks withstand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their passage, while they labour to the land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ebbing tides bear back upon th’ uncertain sand.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now Turnus leads his troops without delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advancing to the margin of the sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trumpets sound: Aeneas first assail’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The clowns new-rais’d and raw, and soon prevail’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great Theron fell, an omen of the fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great Theron, large of limbs, of giant height.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He first in open field defied the prince:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But armour scal’d with gold was no defence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against the fated sword, which open’d wide</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His plated shield, and pierc’d his naked side.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Next, Lichas fell, who, not like others born,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was from his wretched mother ripp’d and torn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sacred, O Phoebus, from his birth to thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his beginning life from biting steel was free.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not far from him was Gyas laid along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of monstrous bulk; with Cisseus fierce and strong:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vain bulk and strength! for, when the chief assail’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor valour nor Herculean arms avail’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor their fam’d father, wont in war to go</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With great Alcides, while he toil’d below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The noisy Pharos next receiv’d his death:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas writh’d his dart, and stopp’d his bawling breath.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then wretched Cydon had receiv’d his doom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who courted Clytius in his beardless bloom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sought with lust obscene polluted joys:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan sword had cur’d his love of boys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not his sev’n bold brethren stopp’d the course</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the fierce champions, with united force.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sev’n darts were thrown at once; and some rebound</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his bright shield, some on his helmet sound:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rest had reach’d him; but his mother’s care</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prevented those, and turn’d aside in air.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The prince then call’d Achates, to supply</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spears that knew the way to victory⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Those fatal weapons, which, inur’d to blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Grecian bodies under Ilium stood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not one of those my hand shall toss in vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against our foes, on this contended plain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said; then seiz’d a mighty spear, and threw;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, wing’d with fate, thro’ Maeon’s buckler flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pierc’d all the brazen plates, and reach’d his heart:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stagger’d with intolerable smart.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcanor saw; and reach’d, but reach’d in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His helping hand, his brother to sustain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A second spear, which kept the former course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the same hand, and sent with equal force,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His right arm pierc’d, and holding on, bereft</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His use of both, and pinion’d down his left.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Numitor from his dead brother drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ ill-omen’d spear, and at the Trojan threw:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Preventing fate directs the lance awry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, glancing, only mark’d Achates’ thigh.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In pride of youth the Sabine Clausus came,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, from afar, at Dryops took his aim.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spear flew hissing thro’ the middle space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pierc’d his throat, directed at his face;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It stopp’d at once the passage of his wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the free soul to flitting air resign’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His forehead was the first that struck the ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifeblood and life rush’d mingled thro’ the wound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He slew three brothers of the Borean race,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And three, whom Ismarus, their native place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had sent to war, but all the sons of Thrace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Halesus, next, the bold Aurunci leads:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The son of Neptune to his aid succeeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conspicuous on his horse. On either hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These fight to keep, and those to win, the land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With mutual blood th’ Ausonian soil is dyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While on its borders each their claim decide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As wintry winds, contending in the sky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With equal force of lungs their titles try:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They rage, they roar; the doubtful rack of heav’n</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands without motion, and the tide undriv’n:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each bent to conquer, neither side to yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They long suspend the fortune of the field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both armies thus perform what courage can;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foot set to foot, and mingled man to man.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But, in another part, th’ Arcadian horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With ill success engage the Latin force:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, where th’ impetuous torrent, rushing down,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Huge craggy stones and rooted trees had thrown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They left their coursers, and, unus’d to fight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On foot, were scatter’d in a shameful flight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pallas, who with disdain and grief had view’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His foes pursuing, and his friends pursued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Us’d threat’nings mix’d with pray’rs, his last resource,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With these to move their minds, with those to fire their force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Which way, companions? whether would you run?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By you yourselves, and mighty battles won,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By my great sire, by his establish’d name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And early promise of my future fame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By my youth, emulous of equal right</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To share his honours⁠—shun ignoble flight!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trust not your feet: your hands must hew way</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thro’ yon black body, and that thick array:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis thro’ that forward path that we must come;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There lies our way, and that our passage home.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor pow’rs above, nor destinies below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oppress our arms: with equal strength we go,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With mortal hands to meet a mortal foe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See on what foot we stand: a scanty shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The sea behind, our enemies before;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No passage left, unless we swim the main;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, forcing these, the Trojan trenches gain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This said, he strode with eager haste along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bore amidst the thickest of the throng.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lagus, the first he met, with fate to foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had heav’d a stone of mighty weight, to throw:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stooping, the spear descended on his chine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just where the bone distinguished either loin:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It stuck so fast, so deeply buried lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That scarce the victor forc’d the steel away.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hisbon came on: but, while he mov’d too slow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wish’d revenge, the prince prevents his blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, warding his at once, at once he press’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And plung’d the fatal weapon in his breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then lewd Anchemolus he laid in dust,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who stain’d his stepdam’s bed with impious lust.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, after him, the Daucian twins were slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laris and Thymbrus, on the Latian plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So wondrous like in feature, shape, and size,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As caus’d an error in their parents’ eyes⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grateful mistake! but soon the sword decides</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The nice distinction, and their fate divides:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Thymbrus’ head was lopp’d; and Laris’ hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dismember’d, sought its owner on the strand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The trembling fingers yet the falchion strain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And threaten still th’ intended stroke in vain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now, to renew the charge, th’ Arcadians came:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sight of such acts, and sense of honest shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And grief, with anger mix’d, their minds inflame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, with a casual blow was Rhoeteus slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who chanc’d, as Pallas threw, to cross the plain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flying spear was after Ilus sent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Rhoeteus happen’d on a death unmeant:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Teuthras and from Tyres while he fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lance, athwart his body, laid him dead:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roll’d from his chariot with a mortal wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And intercepted fate, he spurn’d the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As when, in summer, welcome winds arise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The watchful shepherd to the forest flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And fires the midmost plants; contagion spreads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And catching flames infect the neighb’ring heads;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the forest flies the furious blast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all the leafy nation sinks at last,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Vulcan rides in triumph o’er the waste;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pastor, pleas’d with his dire victory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beholds the satiate flames in sheets ascend the sky:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So Pallas’ troops their scatter’d strength unite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, pouring on their foes, their prince delight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Halesus came, fierce with desire of blood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But first collected in his arms he stood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Advancing then, he plied the spear so well,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ladon, Demodocus, and Pheres fell.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around his head he toss’d his glitt’ring brand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And from Strymonius hew’d his better hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held up to guard his throat; then hurl’d a stone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Thoas’ ample front, and pierc’d the bone:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It struck beneath the space of either eye;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And blood, and mingled brains, together fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep skill’d in future fates, Halesus’ sire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did with the youth to lonely groves retire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, when the father’s mortal race was run,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dire destiny laid hold upon the son,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And haul’d him to the war, to find, beneath</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ Evandrian spear, a memorable death.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pallas th’ encounter seeks, but, ere he throws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Tuscan Tiber thus address’d his vows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O sacred stream, direct my flying dart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give to pass the proud Halesus’ heart!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arms and spoils thy holy oak shall bear.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pleas’d with the bribe, the god receiv’d his pray’r:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, while his shield protects a friend distress’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dart came driving on, and pierc’d his breast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But Lausus, no small portion of the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Permits not panic fear to reign too far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caus’d by the death of so renown’d a knight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But by his own example cheers the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fierce Abas first he slew; Abas, the stay</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Trojan hopes, and hindrance of the day.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Phrygian troops escap’d the Greeks in vain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They, and their mix’d allies, now load the plain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the rude shock of war both armies came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their leaders equal, and their strength the same.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The rear so press’d the front, they could not wield</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their angry weapons, to dispute the field.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here Pallas urges on, and Lausus there:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of equal youth and beauty both appear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But both by fate forbid to breathe their native air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their congress in the field great Jove withstands:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both doom’d to fall, but fall by greater hands.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime Juturna warns the Daunian chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Lausus’ danger, urging swift relief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his driv’n chariot he divides the crowd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, making to his friends, thus calls aloud:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let none presume his needless aid to join;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Retire, and clear the field; the fight is mine:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To this right hand is Pallas only due;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O were his father here, my just revenge to view!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the forbidden space his men retir’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pallas their awe, and his stern words, admir’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Survey’d him o’er and o’er with wond’ring sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck with his haughty mien, and tow’ring height.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then to the king: “Your empty vaunts forbear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Success I hope, and fate I cannot fear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alive or dead, I shall deserve a name;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jove is impartial, and to both the same.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, and to the void advanc’d his pace:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pale horror sate on each Arcadian face.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Turnus, from his chariot leaping light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Address’d himself on foot to single fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as a lion⁠—when he spies from far</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bull that seems to meditate the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bending his neck, and spurning back the sand⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Runs roaring downward from his hilly stand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Imagine eager Turnus not more slow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rush from high on his unequal foe.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Young Pallas, when he saw the chief advance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Within due distance of his flying lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prepares to charge him first, resolv’d to try</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If fortune would his want of force supply;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus to Heav’n and Hercules address’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Alcides, once on earth Evander’s guest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His son adjures you by those holy rites,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That hospitable board, those genial nights;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Assist my great attempt to gain this prize,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And let proud Turnus view, with dying eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His ravish’d spoils.” ’Twas heard, the vain request;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcides mourn’d, and stifled sighs within his breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Jove, to soothe his sorrow, thus began:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Short bounds of life are set to mortal man.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis virtue’s work alone to stretch the narrow span.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So many sons of gods, in bloody fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Around the walls of Troy, have lost the light:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My own Sarpedon fell beneath his foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor I, his mighty sire, could ward the blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ev’n Turnus shortly shall resign his breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And stands already on the verge of death.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This said, the god permits the fatal fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But from the Latian fields averts his sight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now with full force his spear young Pallas threw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, having thrown, his shining falchion drew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The steel just graz’d along the shoulder joint,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mark’d it slightly with the glancing point,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fierce Turnus first to nearer distance drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pois’d his pointed spear, before he threw:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, as the winged weapon whizz’d along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“See now,” said he, “whose arm is better strung.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spear kept on the fatal course, unstay’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By plates of ir’n, which o’er the shield were laid:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thro’ folded brass and tough bull hides it pass’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His corslet pierc’d, and reach’d his heart at last.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In vain the youth tugs at the broken wood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The soul comes issuing with the vital blood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He falls; his arms upon his body sound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with his bloody teeth he bites the ground.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Turnus bestrode the corpse: “Arcadians, hear,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said he; “my message to your master bear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such as the sire deserv’d, the son I send;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It costs him dear to be the Phrygians’ friend.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lifeless body, tell him, I bestow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unask’d, to rest his wand’ring ghost below.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, and trampled down with all the force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his left foot, and spurn’d the wretched corse;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then snatch’d the shining belt, with gold inlaid;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The belt Eurytion’s artful hands had made,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where fifty fatal brides, express’d to sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All in the compass of one mournful night,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Depriv’d their bridegrooms of returning light.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In an ill hour insulting Turnus tore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those golden spoils, and in a worse he wore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O mortals, blind in fate, who never know</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bear high fortune, or endure the low!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The time shall come, when Turnus, but in vain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall wish untouch’d the trophies of the slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall wish the fatal belt were far away,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And curse the dire remembrance of the day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The sad Arcadians, from th’ unhappy field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear back the breathless body on a shield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O grace and grief of war! at once restor’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With praises, to thy sire, at once deplor’d!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One day first sent thee to the fighting field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beheld whole heaps of foes in battle kill’d;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One day beheld thee dead, and borne upon thy shield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This dismal news, not from uncertain fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But sad spectators, to the hero came:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His friends upon the brink of ruin stand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unless reliev’d by his victorious hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He whirls his sword around, without delay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And hews thro’ adverse foes an ample way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To find fierce Turnus, of his conquest proud:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evander, Pallas, all that friendship ow’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To large deserts, are present to his eyes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His plighted hand, and hospitable ties.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Four sons of Sulmo, four whom Ufens bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He took in fight, and living victims led,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To please the ghost of Pallas, and expire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sacrifice, before his fun’ral fire.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Magus next he threw: he stoop’d below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flying spear, and shunn’d the promis’d blow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, creeping, clasp’d the hero’s knees, and pray’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“By young Iülus, by thy father’s shade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O spare my life, and send me back to see</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My longing sire, and tender progeny!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A lofty house I have, and wealth untold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In silver ingots, and in bars of gold:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All these, and sums besides, which see no day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The ransom of this one poor life shall pay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I survive, will Troy the less prevail?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A single soul’s too light to turn the scale.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said. The hero sternly thus replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thy bars and ingots, and the sums beside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave for thy children’s lot. Thy Turnus broke</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All rules of war by one relentless stroke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When Pallas fell: so deems, nor deems alone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My father’s shadow, but my living son.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus having said, of kind remorse bereft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He seiz’d his helm, and dragg’d him with his left;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then with his right hand, while his neck he wreath’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Up to the hilts his shining falchion sheath’d.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Apollo’s priest, Emonides, was near;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His holy fillets on his front appear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glitt’ring in arms, he shone amidst the crowd;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much of his god, more of his purple, proud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him the fierce Trojan follow’d thro’ the field:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The holy coward fell; and, forc’d to yield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prince stood o’er the priest, and, at one blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent him an off’ring to the shades below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His arms Seresthus on his shoulders bears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Design’d a trophy to the God of Wars.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Vulcanian Caeculus renews the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Umbro, born upon the mountains’ height.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The champion cheers his troops t’ encounter those,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seeks revenge himself on other foes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Anxur’s shield he drove; and, at the blow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both shield and arm to ground together go.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anxur had boasted much of magic charms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thought he wore impenetrable arms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So made by mutter’d spells; and, from the spheres,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had life secur’d, in vain, for length of years.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Tarquitus the field in triumph trod;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A nymph his mother, his sire a god.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exulting in bright arms, he braves the prince:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his protended lance he makes defence;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bears back his feeble foe; then, pressing on,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arrests his better hand, and drags him down;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands o’er the prostrate wretch, and, as he lay,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vain tales inventing, and prepar’d to pray,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mows off his head: the trunk a moment stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then sunk, and roll’d along the sand in blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The vengeful victor thus upbraids the slain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lie there, proud man, unpitied, on the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lie there, inglorious, and without a tomb,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from thy mother and thy native home,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exposed to savage beasts, and birds of prey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or thrown for food to monsters of the sea.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On Lycas and Antaeus next he ran,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two chiefs of Turnus, and who led his van.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They fled for fear; with these, he chas’d along</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Camers the yellow-lock’d, and Numa strong;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Both great in arms, and both were fair and young.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Camers was son to Volscens lately slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In wealth surpassing all the Latian train,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in Amycla fix’d his silent easy reign.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, as Aegaeon, when with heav’n he strove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood opposite in arms to mighty Jove;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mov’d all his hundred hands, provok’d the war,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Defied the forky lightning from afar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At fifty mouths his flaming breath expires,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flash for flash returns, and fires for fires;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his right hand as many swords he wields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And takes the thunder on as many shields:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With strength like his, the Trojan hero stood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And soon the fields with falling corps were strow’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When once his falchion found the taste of blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With fury scarce to be conceiv’d, he flew</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against Niphaeus, whom four coursers drew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They, when they see the fiery chief advance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And pushing at their chests his pointed lance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wheel’d with so swift a motion, mad with fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They threw their master headlong from the chair.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They stare, they start, nor stop their course, before</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They bear the bounding chariot to the shore.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now Lucagus and Liger scour the plains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With two white steeds; but Liger holds the reins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Lucagus the lofty seat maintains:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bold brethren both. The former wav’d in air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His flaming sword: Aeneas couch’d his spear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unus’d to threats, and more unus’d to fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Liger thus: “Thy confidence is vain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To scape from hence, as from the Trojan plain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor these the steeds which Diomede bestrode,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor this the chariot where Achilles rode;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor Venus’ veil is here, near Neptune’s shield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy fatal hour is come, and this the field.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus Liger vainly vaunts: the Trojan peer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Return’d his answer with his flying spear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As Lucagus, to lash his horses, bends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prone to the wheels, and his left foot protends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prepar’d for fight; the fatal dart arrives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thro’ the borders of his buckler drives;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass’d thro’ and pierc’d his groin: the deadly wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast from his chariot, roll’d him on the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom thus the chief upbraids with scornful spite:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Blame not the slowness of your steeds in flight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vain shadows did not force their swift retreat;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But you yourself forsake your empty seat.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, and seiz’d at once the loosen’d rein;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For Liger lay already on the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the same shock: then, stretching out his hands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The recreant thus his wretched life demands:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now, by thyself, O more than mortal man!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By her and him from whom thy breath began,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who form’d thee thus divine, I beg thee, spare</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This forfeit life, and hear thy suppliant’s pray’r.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus much he spoke, and more he would have said;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the stern hero turn’d aside his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cut him short: “I hear another man;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You talk’d not thus before the fight began.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now take your turn; and, as a brother should,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Attend your brother to the Stygian flood.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then thro’ his breast his fatal sword he sent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the soul issued at the gaping vent.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As storms the skies, and torrents tear the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus rag’d the prince, and scatter’d deaths around.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length Ascanius and the Trojan train</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broke from the camp, so long besieg’d in vain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime the King of Gods and Mortal Man</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held conference with his queen, and thus began:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My sister goddess, and well-pleasing wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still think you Venus’ aid supports the strife⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sustains her Trojans⁠—or themselves, alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With inborn valour force their fortune on?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How fierce in fight, with courage undecay’d!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Judge if such warriors want immortal aid.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom the goddess with the charming eyes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft in her tone, submissively replies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why, O my sov’reign lord, whose frown I fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And cannot, unconcern’d, your anger bear;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why urge you thus my grief? when, if I still</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(As once I was) were mistress of your will,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From your almighty pow’r your pleasing wife</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might gain the grace of length’ning Turnus’ life,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Securely snatch him from the fatal fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And give him to his aged father’s sight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now let him perish, since you hold it good,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And glut the Trojans with his pious blood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet from our lineage he derives his name,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, in the fourth degree, from god Pilumnus came;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet he devoutly pays you rites divine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And offers daily incense at your shrine.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then shortly thus the sov’reign god replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Since in my pow’r and goodness you confide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If for a little space, a lengthen’d span,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>You beg reprieve for this expiring man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I grant you leave to take your Turnus hence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From instant fate, and can so far dispense.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, if some secret meaning lies beneath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To save the short-liv’d youth from destin’d death,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or if a farther thought you entertain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To change the fates; you feed your hopes in vain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To whom the goddess thus, with weeping eyes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“And what if that request, your tongue denies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Your heart should grant; and not a short reprieve,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But length of certain life, to Turnus give?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now speedy death attends the guiltless youth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If my presaging soul divines with truth;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, O! I wish, might err thro’ causeless fears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And you (for you have pow’r) prolong his years!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus having said, involv’d in clouds, she flies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drives a storm before her thro’ the skies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift she descends, alighting on the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the fierce foes a dubious fight maintain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of air condens’d a spectre soon she made;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, what Aeneas was, such seem’d the shade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adorn’d with Dardan arms, the phantom bore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His head aloft; a plumy crest he wore;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This hand appear’d a shining sword to wield,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And that sustain’d an imitated shield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With manly mien he stalk’d along the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor wanted voice belied, nor vaunting sound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Thus haunting ghosts appear to waking sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or dreadful visions in our dreams by night.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The spectre seems the Daunian chief to dare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flourishes his empty sword in air.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At this, advancing, Turnus hurl’d his spear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The phantom wheel’d, and seem’d to fly for fear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deluded Turnus thought the Trojan fled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with vain hopes his haughty fancy fed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whether, O coward?” (thus he calls aloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor found he spoke to wind, and chas’d a cloud,)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why thus forsake your bride! Receive from me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fated land you sought so long by sea.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, and, brandishing at once his blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With eager pace pursued the flying shade.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By chance a ship was fasten’d to the shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which from old Clusium King Osinius bore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plank was ready laid for safe ascent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For shelter there the trembling shadow bent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And skipp’t and skulk’d, and under hatches went.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Exulting Turnus, with regardless haste,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ascends the plank, and to the galley pass’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce had he reach’d the prow: Saturnia’s hand</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The haulsers cuts, and shoots the ship from land.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With wind in poop, the vessel plows the sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And measures back with speed her former way.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Meantime Aeneas seeks his absent foe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sends his slaughter’d troops to shades below.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The guileful phantom now forsook the shroud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And flew sublime, and vanish’d in a cloud.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too late young Turnus the delusion found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far on the sea, still making from the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, thankless for a life redeem’d by shame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With sense of honour stung, and forfeit fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fearful besides of what in fight had pass’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His hands and haggard eyes to heav’n he cast;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Jove!” he cried, “for what offence have I</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deserv’d to bear this endless infamy?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence am I forc’d, and whether am I borne?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How, and with what reproach, shall I return?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall ever I behold the Latian plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or see Laurentum’s lofty tow’rs again?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What will they say of their deserting chief</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The war was mine: I fly from their relief;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I led to slaughter, and in slaughter leave;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ev’n from hence their dying groans receive.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here, overmatch’d in fight, in heaps they lie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, scatter’d o’er the fields, ignobly fly.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gape wide, O earth, and draw me down alive!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, O ye pitying winds, a wretch relieve!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On sands or shelves the splitting vessel drive;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or set me shipwreck’d on some desert shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where no Rutulian eyes may see me more,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unknown to friends, or foes, or conscious Fame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest she should follow, and my flight proclaim.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus Turnus rav’d, and various fates revolv’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The choice was doubtful, but the death resolv’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And now the sword, and now the sea took place,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That to revenge, and this to purge disgrace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sometimes he thought to swim the stormy main,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By stretch of arms the distant shore to gain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice he the sword assay’d, and thrice the flood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Juno, mov’d with pity, both withstood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thrice repress’d his rage; strong gales supplied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And push’d the vessel o’er the swelling tide.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length she lands him on his native shores,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to his father’s longing arms restores.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime, by Jove’s impulse, Mezentius arm’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Succeeding Turnus, with his ardour warm’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fainting friends, reproach’d their shameful flight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Repell’d the victors, and renew’d the fight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Against their king the Tuscan troops conspire;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such is their hate, and such their fierce desire</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of wish’d revenge: on him, and him alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All hands employ’d, and all their darts are thrown.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, like a solid rock by seas inclos’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To raging winds and roaring waves oppos’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his proud summit looking down, disdains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their empty menace, and unmov’d remains.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Beneath his feet fell haughty Hebrus dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Latagus, and Palmus as he fled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At Latagus a weighty stone he flung:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His face was flatted, and his helmet rung.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Palmus from behind receives his wound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hamstring’d he falls, and grovels on the ground:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His crest and armour, from his body torn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy shoulders, Lausus, and thy head adorn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evas and Mimas, both of Troy, he slew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mimas his birth from fair Theano drew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Born on that fatal night, when, big with fire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The queen produc’d young Paris to his sire:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But Paris in the Phrygian fields was slain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unthinking Mimas on the Latian plain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>And, as a savage boar, on mountains bred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With forest mast and fatt’ning marshes fed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When once he sees himself in toils inclos’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By huntsmen and their eager hounds oppos’d⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He whets his tusks, and turns, and dares the war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Th’ invaders dart their jav’lins from afar:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All keep aloof, and safely shout around;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But none presumes to give a nearer wound:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He frets and froths, erects his bristled hide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And shakes a grove of lances from his side:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not otherwise the troops, with hate inspir’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And just revenge against the tyrant fir’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Their darts with clamour at a distance drive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And only keep the languish’d war alive.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From Coritus came Acron to the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who left his spouse betroth’d, and unconsummate night.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mezentius sees him thro’ the squadrons ride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proud of the purple favours of his bride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, as a hungry lion, who beholds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A gamesome goat, who frisks about the folds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or beamy stag, that grazes on the plain⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He runs, he roars, he shakes his rising mane,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He grins, and opens wide his greedy jaws;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The prey lies panting underneath his paws:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He fills his famish’d maw; his mouth runs o’er</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With unchew’d morsels, while he churns the gore:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So proud Mezentius rushes on his foes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And first unhappy Acron overthrows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretch’d at his length, he spurns the swarthy ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lance, besmear’d with blood, lies broken in the wound.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then with disdain the haughty victor view’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Orodes flying, nor the wretch pursued,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor thought the dastard’s back deserv’d a wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, running, gain’d th’ advantage of the ground:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then turning short, he met him face to face,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To give his victory the better grace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Orodes falls, in equal fight oppress’d:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mezentius fix’d his foot upon his breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And rested lance; and thus aloud he cries:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lo! here the champion of my rebels lies!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The fields around with <i xml:lang="el-Latn">Io Paean</i>! ring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And peals of shouts applaud the conqu’ring king.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At this the vanquish’d, with his dying breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus faintly spoke, and prophesied in death:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nor thou, proud man, unpunish’d shalt remain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like death attends thee on this fatal plain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then, sourly smiling, thus the king replied:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“For what belongs to me, let Jove provide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But die thou first, whatever chance ensue.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, and from the wound the weapon drew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A hov’ring mist came swimming o’er his sight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And seal’d his eyes in everlasting night.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By Caedicus, Alcathous was slain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sacrator laid Hydaspes on the plain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Orses the strong to greater strength must yield;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, with Parthenius, were by Rapo kill’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then brave Messapus Ericetes slew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who from Lycaon’s blood his lineage drew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But from his headstrong horse his fate he found,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who threw his master, as he made a bound:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The chief, alighting, stuck him to the ground;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Clonius, hand to hand, on foot assails:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan sinks, and Neptune’s son prevails.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Agis the Lycian, stepping forth with pride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To single fight the boldest foe defied;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom Tuscan Valerus by force o’ercame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And not belied his mighty father’s fame.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Salius to death the great Antronius sent:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the same fate the victor underwent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain by Nealces’ hand, well-skill’d to throw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The flying dart, and draw the far-deceiving bow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus equal deaths are dealt with equal chance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By turns they quit their ground, by turns advance:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Victors and vanquish’d, in the various field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor wholly overcome, nor wholly yield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gods from heav’n survey the fatal strife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And mourn the miseries of human life.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Above the rest, two goddesses appear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Concern’d for each: here Venus, Juno there.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Amidst the crowd, infernal Ate shakes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her scourge aloft, and crest of hissing snakes.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Once more the proud Mezentius, with disdain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brandish’d his spear, and rush’d into the plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where tow’ring in the midmost rank she stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like tall Orion stalking o’er the flood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(When with his brawny breast he cuts the waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His shoulders scarce the topmost billow laves),</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or like a mountain ash, whose roots are spread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep fix’d in earth; in clouds he hides his head.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The Trojan prince beheld him from afar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And dauntless undertook the doubtful war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Collected in his strength, and like a rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pois’d on his base, Mezentius stood the shock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He stood, and, measuring first with careful eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The space his spear could reach, aloud he cries:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My strong right hand, and sword, assist my stroke!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>(Those only gods Mezentius will invoke.)</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His armour, from the Trojan pirate torn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By my triumphant Lausus shall be worn.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said; and with his utmost force he threw</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The massy spear, which, hissing as it flew,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reach’d the celestial shield, that stopp’d the course;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, glancing thence, the yet unbroken force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took a new bent obliquely, and betwixt</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The side and bowels fam’d Anthores fix’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Anthores had from Argos travel’d far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alcides’ friend, and brother of the war;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till, tir’d with toils, fair Italy he chose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in Evander’s palace sought repose.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, falling by another’s wound, his eyes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He cast to heav’n, on Argos thinks, and dies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>The pious Trojan then his jav’lin sent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The shield gave way; thro’ treble plates it went</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of solid brass, of linen trebly roll’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And three bull hides which round the buckler fold.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All these it pass’d, resistless in the course,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Transpierc’d his thigh, and spent its dying force.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gaping wound gush’d out a crimson flood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan, glad with sight of hostile blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His falchion drew, to closer fight address’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with new force his fainting foe oppress’d.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>His father’s peril Lausus view’d with grief;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He sigh’d, he wept, he ran to his relief.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And here, heroic youth, ’tis here I must</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy immortal memory be just,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And sing an act so noble and so new,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Posterity will scarce believe ’tis true.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pain’d with his wound, and useless for the fight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The father sought to save himself by flight:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Encumber’d, slow he dragg’d the spear along,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which pierc’d his thigh, and in his buckler hung.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pious youth, resolv’d on death, below</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The lifted sword springs forth to face the foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Protects his parent, and prevents the blow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouts of applause ran ringing thro’ the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see the son the vanquish’d father shield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All, fir’d with gen’rous indignation, strive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with a storm of darts to distance drive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Trojan chief, who, held at bay from far,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his Vulcanian orb sustain’d the war.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As, when thick hail comes rattling in the wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The plowman, passenger, and lab’ring hind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For shelter to the neighb’ring covert fly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or hous’d, or safe in hollow caverns lie;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, that o’erblown, when heav’n above ’em smiles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Return to travel, and renew their toils:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas thus, o’erwhelmed on ev’ry side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The storm of darts, undaunted, did abide;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thus to Lausus loud with friendly threat’ning cried:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why wilt thou rush to certain death, and rage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In rash attempts, beyond thy tender age,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Betray’d by pious love?” Nor, thus forborne,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The youth desists, but with insulting scorn</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Provokes the ling’ring prince, whose patience, tir’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave place; and all his breast with fury fir’d.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For now the Fates prepar’d their sharpen’d shears;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lifted high the flaming sword appears,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which, full descending with a frightful sway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thro’ shield and corslet forc’d th’ impetuous way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And buried deep in his fair bosom lay.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The purple streams thro’ the thin armour strove,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drench’d th’ imbroider’d coat his mother wove;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And life at length forsook his heaving heart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loth from so sweet a mansion to depart.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But when, with blood and paleness all o’erspread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The pious prince beheld young Lausus dead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He griev’d; he wept; the sight an image brought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his own filial love, a sadly pleasing thought:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then stretch’d his hand to hold him up, and said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Poor hapless youth! what praises can be paid</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To love so great, to such transcendent store</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of early worth, and sure presage of more?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accept whate’er Aeneas can afford;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Untouch’d thy arms, untaken be thy sword;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all that pleas’d thee living, still remain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inviolate, and sacred to the slain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy body on thy parents I bestow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To rest thy soul, at least, if shadows know,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or have a sense of human things below.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to thy fellow ghosts with glory tell:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘ ’Twas by the great Aeneas hand I fell.’ ”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With this, his distant friends he beckons near,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Provokes their duty, and prevents their fear:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Himself assists to lift him from the ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With clotted locks, and blood that well’d from out the wound.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Meantime, his father, now no father, stood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And wash’d his wounds by Tiber’s yellow flood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oppress’d with anguish, panting, and o’erspent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fainting limbs against an oak he leant.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A bough his brazen helmet did sustain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His heavier arms lay scatter’d on the plain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>A chosen train of youth around him stand;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His drooping head was rested on his hand:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His grisly beard his pensive bosom sought;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And all on Lausus ran his restless thought.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Careful, concern’d his danger to prevent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He much enquir’d, and many a message sent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To warn him from the field⁠—alas! in vain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Behold, his mournful followers bear him slain!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er his broad shield still gush’d the yawning wound,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And drew a bloody trail along the ground.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far off he heard their cries, far off divin’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The dire event, with a foreboding mind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With dust he sprinkled first his hoary head;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then both his lifted hands to heav’n he spread;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Last, the dear corpse embracing, thus he said:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What joys, alas! could this frail being give,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I have been so covetous to live?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To see my son, and such a son, resign</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His life, a ransom for preserving mine!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And am I then preserv’d, and art thou lost?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How much too dear has that redemption cost!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis now my bitter banishment I feel:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is a wound too deep for time to heal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My guilt thy growing virtues did defame;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My blackness blotted thy unblemish’d name.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chas’d from a throne, abandon’d, and exil’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For foul misdeeds, were punishments too mild:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I ow’d my people these, and, from their hate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With less resentment could have borne my fate.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And yet I live, and yet sustain the sight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of hated men, and of more hated light:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But will not long.” With that he rais’d from ground</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His fainting limbs, that stagger’d with his wound;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet, with a mind resolv’d, and unappall’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pains or perils, for his courser call’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well-mouth’d, well-manag’d, whom himself did dress</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With daily care, and mounted with success;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His aid in arms, his ornament in peace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Soothing his courage with a gentle stroke,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The steed seem’d sensible, while thus he spoke:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Rhoebus, we have liv’d too long for me⁠—</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If life and long were terms that could agree!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This day thou either shalt bring back the head</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And bloody trophies of the Trojan dead;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This day thou either shalt revenge my woe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For murder’d Lausus, on his cruel foe;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, if inexorable fate deny</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Our conquest, with thy conquer’d master die:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For, after such a lord, I rest secure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt no foreign reins, or Trojan load endure.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said; and straight th’ officious courser kneels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To take his wonted weight. His hands he fills</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With pointed jav’lins; on his head he lac’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His glitt’ring helm, which terribly was grac’d</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With waving horsehair, nodding from afar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then spurr’d his thund’ring steed amidst the war.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Love, anguish, wrath, and grief, to madness wrought,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Despair, and secret shame, and conscious thought</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of inborn worth, his lab’ring soul oppress’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roll’d in his eyes, and rag’d within his breast.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then loud he call’d Aeneas thrice by name:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The loud repeated voice to glad Aeneas came.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Great Jove,” he said, “and the far-shooting god,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Inspire thy mind to make thy challenge good!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He spoke no more; but hasten’d, void of fear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And threaten’d with his long protended spear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To whom Mezentius thus: “Thy vaunts are vain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My Lausus lies extended on the plain:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He’s lost! thy conquest is already won;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wretched sire is murder’d in the son.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor fate I fear, but all the gods defy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forbear thy threats: my bus’ness is to die;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But first receive this parting legacy.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said; and straight a whirling dart he sent;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Another after, and another went.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round in a spacious ring he rides the field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vainly plies th’ impenetrable shield.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice rode he round; and thrice Aeneas wheel’d,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turn’d as he turn’d: the golden orb withstood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The strokes, and bore about an iron wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Impatient of delay, and weary grown,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still to defend, and to defend alone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To wrench the darts which in his buckler light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Urg’d and o’er-labour’d in unequal fight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At length resolv’d, he throws with all his force</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full at the temples of the warrior horse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Just where the stroke was aim’d, th’ unerring spear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made way, and stood transfix’d thro’ either ear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seiz’d with unwonted pain, surpris’d with fright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The wounded steed curvets, and, rais’d upright,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lights on his feet before; his hoofs behind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spring up in air aloft, and lash the wind.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down comes the rider headlong from his height:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His horse came after with unwieldy weight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And, flound’ring forward, pitching on his head,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His lord’s encumber’d shoulder overlaid.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From either host, the mingled shouts and cries</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Trojans and Rutulians rend the skies.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aeneas, hast’ning, wav’d his fatal sword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>High o’er his head, with this reproachful word:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now; where are now thy vaunts, the fierce disdain</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of proud Mezentius, and the lofty strain?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Struggling, and wildly staring on the skies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With scarce recover’d sight he thus replies:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why these insulting words, this waste of breath,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To souls undaunted, and secure of death?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis no dishonour for the brave to die,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor came I here with hope victory;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor ask I life, nor fought with that design:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I had us’d my fortune, use thou thine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My dying son contracted no such band;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The gift is hateful from his murd’rer’s hand.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this, this only favour let me sue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If pity can to conquer’d foes be due:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Refuse it not; but let my body have</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The last retreat of humankind, a grave.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too well I know th’ insulting people’s hate;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Protect me from their vengeance after fate:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This refuge for my poor remains provide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And lay my much-lov’d Lausus by my side.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He said, and to the sword his throat applied.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The crimson stream distain’d his arms around,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the disdainful soul came rushing thro’ the wound.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
