<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="argument-12" epub:type="preamble">
				<header>
					<p>The Argument</p>
				</header>
				<p>Turnus challenges Aeneas to a single combat: articles are agreed on, but broken by the Rutuli, who wound Aeneas. He is miraculously cured by Venus, forces Turnus to a duel, and concludes the poem with his death.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="poem-12" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>When Turnus saw the Latins leave the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their armies broken, and their courage quell’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself become the mark of public spite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His honour question’d for the promis’d fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more he was with vulgar hate oppress’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more his fury boil’d within his breast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rous’d his vigour for the last debate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rais’d his haughty soul to meet his fate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As, when the swains the Libyan lion chase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He makes a sour retreat, nor mends his pace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, if the pointed jav’lin pierce his side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lordly beast returns with double pride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wrenches out the steel, he roars for pain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sides he lashes, and erects his mane:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Turnus fares; his eyeballs flash with fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thro’ his wide nostrils clouds of smoke expire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Trembling with rage, around the court he ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length approach’d the king, and thus began:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“No more excuses or delays: I stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In arms prepar’d to combat, hand to hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This base deserter of his native land.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Trojan, by his word, is bound to take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same conditions which himself did make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Renew the truce; the solemn rites prepare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to my single virtue trust the war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Latians unconcern’d shall see the fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This arm unaided shall assert your right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, if my prostrate body press the plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him the crown and beauteous bride remain.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To whom the king sedately thus replied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Brave youth, the more your valour has been tried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more becomes it us, with due respect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To weigh the chance of war, which you neglect.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You want not wealth, or a successive throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or cities which your arms have made your own:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My towns and treasures are at your command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stor’d with blooming beauties is my land;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laurentum more than one Lavinia sees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unmarried, fair, of noble families.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now let me speak, and you with patience hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Things which perhaps may grate a lover’s ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sound advice, proceeding from a heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sincerely yours, and free from fraudful art.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gods, by signs, have manifestly shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No prince Italian born should heir my throne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oft have our augurs, in prediction skill’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oft our priests, a foreign son reveal’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, won by worth that cannot be withstood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brib’d by my kindness to my kindred blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Urg’d by my wife, who would not be denied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I promis’d my Lavinia for your bride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her from her plighted lord by force I took;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All ties of treaties, and of honour, broke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On your account I wag’d an impious war⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With what success, ’tis needless to declare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I and my subjects feel, and you have had your share.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twice vanquish’d while in bloody fields we strive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce in our walls we keep our hopes alive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rolling flood runs warm with human gore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bones of Latians blanch the neighb’ring shore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why put I not an end to this debate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still unresolv’d, and still a slave to fate?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Turnus’ death a lasting peace can give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I not procure it whilst you live?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should I to doubtful arms your youth betray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What would my kinsmen, the Rutulians, say?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, should you fall in fight, (which Heav’n defend!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How curse the cause which hasten’d to his end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The daughter’s lover and the father’s friend?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weigh in your mind the various chance of war;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pity your parent’s age, and ease his care.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Such balmy words he pour’d, but all in vain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The proffer’d med’cine but provok’d the pain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wrathful youth, disdaining the relief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With intermitting sobs thus vents his grief:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The care, O best of fathers, which you take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For my concerns, at my desire forsake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Permit me not to languish out my days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But make the best exchange of life for praise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This arm, this lance, can well dispute the prize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the blood follows, where the weapon flies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His goddess mother is not near, to shroud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flying coward with an empty cloud.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But now the queen, who fear’d for Turnus’ life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And loath’d the hard conditions of the strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Held him by force; and, dying in his death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In these sad accents gave her sorrow breath:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O Turnus, I adjure thee by these tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whate’er price Amata’s honour bears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within thy breast, since thou art all my hope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My sickly mind’s repose, my sinking age’s prop;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since on the safety of thy life alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Depends Latinus, and the Latian throne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Refuse me not this one, this only pray’r,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To waive the combat, and pursue the war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever chance attends this fatal strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think it includes, in thine, Amata’s life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cannot live a slave, or see my throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Usurp’d by strangers or a Trojan son.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At this, a flood of tears Lavinia shed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A crimson blush her beauteous face o’erspread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Varying her cheeks by turns with white and red.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The driving colours, never at a stay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Run here and there, and flush, and fade away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delightful change! Thus Indian iv’ry shows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which with the bord’ring paint of purple glows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or lilies damask’d by the neighb’ring rose.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The lover gaz’d, and, burning with desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more he look’d, the more he fed the fire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Revenge, and jealous rage, and secret spite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roll in his breast, and rouse him to the fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then fixing on the queen his ardent eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Firm to his first intent, he thus replies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O mother, do not by your tears prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such boding omens, and prejudge the war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resolv’d on fight, I am no longer free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shun my death, if Heav’n my death decree.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then turning to the herald, thus pursues:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Go, greet the Trojan with ungrateful news;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Denounce from me, that, when tomorrow’s light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall gild the heav’ns, he need not urge the fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Trojan and Rutulian troops no more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall dye, with mutual blood, the Latian shore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our single swords the quarrel shall decide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the victor be the beauteous bride.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He said, and striding on, with speedy pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He sought his coursers of the Thracian race.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At his approach they toss their heads on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, proudly neighing, promise victory.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sires of these Orythia sent from far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To grace Pilumnus, when he went to war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The drifts of Thracian snows were scarce so white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor northern winds in fleetness match’d their flight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Officious grooms stand ready by his side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some with combs their flowing manes divide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And others stroke their chests and gently soothe their pride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He sheath’d his limbs in arms; a temper’d mass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of golden metal those, and mountain brass.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to his head his glitt’ring helm he tied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And girt his faithful falchion to his side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his Aetnaean forge, the God of Fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That falchion labour’d for the hero’s sire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immortal keenness on the blade bestow’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plung’d it hissing in the Stygian flood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Propp’d on a pillar, which the ceiling bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was plac’d the lance Auruncan Actor wore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which with such force he brandish’d in his hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tough ash trembled like an osier wand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then cried: “O pond’rous spoil of Actor slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never yet by Turnus toss’d in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fail not this day thy wonted force; but go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sent by this hand, to pierce the Trojan foe!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give me to tear his corslet from his breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from that eunuch head to rend the crest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dragg’d in the dust, his frizzled hair to soil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hot from the vexing ir’n, and smear’d with fragrant oil!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus while he raves, from his wide nostrils flies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fiery steam, and sparkles from his eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fares the bull in his lov’d female’s sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proudly he bellows, and preludes the fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He tries his goring horns against a tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And meditates his absent enemy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He pushes at the winds; he digs the strand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his black hoofs, and spurns the yellow sand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nor less the Trojan, in his Lemnian arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To future fight his manly courage warms:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He whets his fury, and with joy prepares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To terminate at once the ling’ring wars;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cheer his chiefs and tender son, relates</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What Heav’n had promis’d, and expounds the fates.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to the Latian king he sends, to cease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rage of arms, and ratify the peace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The morn ensuing, from the mountain’s height,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had scarcely spread the skies with rosy light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ ethereal coursers, bounding from the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From out their flaming nostrils breath’d the day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When now the Trojan and Rutulian guard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In friendly labour join’d, the list prepar’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath the walls they measure out the space;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then sacred altars rear, on sods of grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, with religious their common gods they place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In purest white the priests their heads attire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And living waters bear, and holy fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, o’er their linen hoods and shaded hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long twisted wreaths of sacred vervain wear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In order issuing from the town appears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Latin legion, arm’d with pointed spears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the fields, advancing on a line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Trojan and the Tuscan forces join:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their various arms afford a pleasing sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A peaceful train they seem, in peace prepar’d for fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt the ranks the proud commanders ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glitt’ring with gold, and vests in purple dyed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here Mnestheus, author of the Memmian line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there Messapus, born of seed divine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sign is giv’n; and, round the listed space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each man in order fills his proper place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reclining on their ample shields, they stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fix their pointed lances in the sand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, studious of the sight, a num’rous throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of either sex promiscuous, old and young,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swarm the town: by those who rest behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gates and walls and houses’ tops are lin’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime the Queen of Heav’n beheld the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With eyes unpleas’d, from Mount Albano’s height</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Since call’d Albano by succeeding fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But then an empty hill, without a name).</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She thence survey’d the field, the Trojan pow’rs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Latian squadrons, and Laurentine tow’rs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then thus the goddess of the skies bespoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With sighs and tears, the goddess of the lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>King Turnus’ sister, once a lovely maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere to the lust of lawless Jove betray’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Compress’d by force, but, by the grateful god,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now made the Nais of the neighb’ring flood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O nymph, the pride of living lakes,” said she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O most renown’d, and most belov’d by me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long hast thou known, nor need I to record,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wanton sallies of my wand’ring lord.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ev’ry Latian fair whom Jove misled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mount by stealth my violated bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thee alone I grudg’d not his embrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But gave a part of heav’n, and an unenvied place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now learn from me thy near approaching grief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor think my wishes want to thy relief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While fortune favour’d, nor Heav’n’s King denied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lend my succour to the Latian side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sav’d thy brother, and the sinking state:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now he struggles with unequal fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And goes, with gods averse, o’ermatch’d in might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To meet inevitable death in fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor must I break the truce, nor can sustain the sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou, if thou dar’st thy present aid supply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It well becomes a sister’s care to try.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>At this the lovely nymph, with grief oppress’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrice tore her hair, and beat her comely breast.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom Saturnia thus: “Thy tears are late:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haste, snatch him, if he can be snatch’d from fate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New tumults kindle; violate the truce:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who knows what changeful fortune may produce?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis not a crime t’ attempt what I decree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, if it were, discharge the crime on me.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She said, and, sailing on the winged wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left the sad nymph suspended in her mind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now in pomp the peaceful kings appear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Four steeds the chariot of Latinus bear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twelve golden beams around his temples play,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mark his lineage from the God of Day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two snowy coursers Turnus’ chariot yoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in his hand two massy spears he shook:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then issued from the camp, in arms divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aeneas, author of the Roman line;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by his side Ascanius took his place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The second hope of Rome’s immortal race.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adorn’d in white, a rev’rend priest appears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And off’rings to the flaming altars bears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A porket, and a lamb that never suffer’d shears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to the rising sun he turns his eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strews the beasts, design’d for sacrifice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With salt and meal: with like officious care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He marks their foreheads, and he clips their hair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt their horns the purple wine he sheds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the same gen’rous juice the flame he feeds.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Aeneas then unsheath’d his shining sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus with pious pray’rs the gods ador’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“All-seeing sun, and thou, Ausonian soil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which I have sustain’d so long a toil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou, King of Heav’n, and thou, the Queen of Air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Propitious now, and reconcil’d by pray’r;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou, God of War, whose unresisted sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The labours and events of arms obey;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye living fountains, and ye running floods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All pow’rs of ocean, all ethereal gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hear, and bear record: if I fall in field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, recreant in the fight, to Turnus yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Trojans shall encrease Evander’s town;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ascanius shall renounce th’ Ausonian crown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All claims, all questions of debate, shall cease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor he, nor they, with force infringe the peace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, if my juster arms prevail in fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(As sure they shall, if I divine aright,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Trojans shall not o’er th’ Italians reign:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both equal, both unconquer’d shall remain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Join’d in their laws, their lands, and their abodes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I ask but altars for my weary gods.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The care of those religious rites be mine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crown to King Latinus I resign:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His be the sov’reign sway. Nor will I share</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His pow’r in peace, or his command in war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For me, my friends another town shall frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bless the rising tow’rs with fair Lavinia’s name.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus he. Then, with erected eyes and hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Latian king before his altar stands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“By the same heav’n,” said he, “and earth, and main,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the pow’rs that all the three contain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By hell below, and by that upper god</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose thunder signs the peace, who seals it with his nod;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So let Latona’s double offspring hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And double-fronted Janus, what I swear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I touch the sacred altars, touch the flames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all those pow’rs attest, and all their names;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever chance befall on either side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No term of time this union shall divide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No force, no fortune, shall my vows unbind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or shake the steadfast tenor of my mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not tho’ the circling seas should break their bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erflow the shores, or sap the solid ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not tho’ the lamps of heav’n their spheres forsake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hurl’d down, and hissing in the nether lake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ev’n as this royal scepter” (for he bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A scepter in his hand) “shall never more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shoot out in branches, or renew the birth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An orphan now, cut from the mother earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the keen ax, dishonour’d of its hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cas’d in brass, for Latian kings to bear.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When thus in public view the peace was tied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With solemn vows, and sworn on either side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All dues perform’d which holy rites require;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The victim beasts are slain before the fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The trembling entrails from their bodies torn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the fatten’d flames in chargers borne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Already the Rutulians deem their man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’ermatch’d in arms, before the fight began.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First rising fears are whisper’d thro’ the crowd;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, gath’ring sound, they murmur more aloud.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, side to side, they measure with their eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The champions’ bulk, their sinews, and their size:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nearer they approach, the more is known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ apparent disadvantage of their own.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turnus himself appears in public sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conscious of fate, desponding of the fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slowly he moves, and at his altar stands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With eyes dejected, and with trembling hands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, while he mutters undistinguish’d pray’rs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A livid deadness in his cheeks appears.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>With anxious pleasure when Juturna view’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ increasing fright of the mad multitude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When their short sighs and thick’ning sobs she heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And found their ready minds for change prepar’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dissembling her immortal form, she took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Camertus’ mien, his habit, and his look;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A chief of ancient blood; in arms well known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was his great sire, and he his greater son.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His shape assum’d, amid the ranks she ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And humoring their first motions, thus began:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“For shame, Rutulians, can you bear the sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of one expos’d for all, in single fight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can we, before the face of heav’n, confess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our courage colder, or our numbers less?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>View all the Trojan host, th’ Arcadian band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Tuscan army; count ’em as they stand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Undaunted to the battle if we go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce ev’ry second man will share a foe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turnus, ’tis true, in this unequal strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall lose, with honour, his devoted life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or change it rather for immortal fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Succeeding to the gods, from whence he came:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But you, a servile and inglorious band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For foreign lords shall sow your native land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those fruitful fields your fighting fathers gain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which have so long their lazy sons sustain’d.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With words like these, she carried her design:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A rising murmur runs along the line.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then ev’n the city troops, and Latians, tir’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With tedious war, seem with new souls inspir’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their champion’s fate with pity they lament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of the league, so lately sworn, repent.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Nor fails the goddess to foment the rage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With lying wonders, and a false presage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But adds a sign, which, present to their eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inspires new courage, and a glad surprise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, sudden, in the fiery tracts above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appears in pomp th’ imperial bird of Jove:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A plump of fowl he spies, that swim the lakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And o’er their heads his sounding pinions shakes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, stooping on the fairest of the train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his strong talons truss’d a silver swan.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ Italians wonder at th’ unusual sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, while he lags, and labours in his flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold, the dastard fowl return anew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with united force the foe pursue:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clam’rous around the royal hawk they fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, thick’ning in a cloud, o’ershade the sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They cuff, they scratch, they cross his airy course;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor can th’ incumber’d bird sustain their force;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But vex’d, not vanquish’d, drops the pond’rous prey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, lighten’d of his burthen, wings his way.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Th’ Ausonian bands with shouts salute the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eager of action, and demand the fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then King Tolumnius, vers’d in augurs’ arts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cries out, and thus his boasted skill imparts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“At length ’tis granted, what I long desir’d!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This, this is what my frequent vows requir’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye gods, I take your omen, and obey.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Advance, my friends, and charge! I lead the way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These are the foreign foes, whose impious band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like that rapacious bird, infest our land:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But soon, like him, they shall be forc’d to sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By strength united, and forego the prey.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your timely succour to your country bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haste to the rescue, and redeem your king.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He said; and, pressing onward thro’ the crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pois’d in his lifted arm, his lance he threw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The winged weapon, whistling in the wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came driving on, nor miss’d the mark design’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At once the cornel rattled in the skies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At once tumultuous shouts and clamours rise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nine brothers in a goodly band there stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Born of Arcadian mix’d with Tuscan blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gylippus’ sons: the fatal jav’lin flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aim’d at the midmost of the friendly crew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A passage thro’ the jointed arms it found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just where the belt was to the body bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And struck the gentle youth extended on the ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, fir’d with pious rage, the gen’rous train</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Run madly forward to revenge the slain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some with eager haste their jav’lins throw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some with sword in hand assault the foe.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The wish’d insult the Latine troops embrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And meet their ardour in the middle space.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Trojans, Tuscans, and Arcadian line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With equal courage obviate their design.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peace leaves the violated fields, and hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both armies urges to their mutual fate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With impious haste their altars are o’erturn’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sacrifice half-broil’d, and half-unburn’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thick storms of steel from either army fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And clouds of clashing darts obscure the sky;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brands from the fire are missive weapons made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With chargers, bowls, and all the priestly trade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Latinus, frighted, hastens from the fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bears his unregarded gods away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These on their horses vault; those yoke the car;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest, with swords on high, run headlong to the war.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Messapus, eager to confound the peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spurr’d his hot courser thro’ the fighting press,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At King Aulestes, by his purple known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Tuscan prince, and by his regal crown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, with a shock encount’ring, bore him down.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Backward he fell; and, as his fate design’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ruins of an altar were behind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, pitching on his shoulders and his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the scatt’ring fires he lay supinely spread.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The beamy spear, descending from above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His cuirass pierc’d, and thro’ his body drove.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, with a scornful smile, the victor cries:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The gods have found a fitter sacrifice.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Greedy of spoils, th’ Italians strip the dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his rich armour, and uncrown his head.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Priest Corynaeus, arm’d his better hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his own altar, with a blazing brand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as Ebusus with a thund’ring pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Advanc’d to battle, dash’d it on his face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His bristly beard shines out with sudden fires;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crackling crop a noisome scent expires.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Following the blow, he seiz’d his curling crown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his left hand; his other cast him down.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The prostrate body with his knees he press’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plung’d his holy poniard in his breast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>While Podalirius, with his sword, pursued</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shepherd Alsus thro’ the flying crowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swiftly he turns, and aims a deadly blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full on the front of his unwary foe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The broad ax enters with a crashing sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cleaves the chin with one continued wound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warm blood, and mingled brains, besmear his arms around</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An iron sleep his stupid eyes oppress’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seal’d their heavy lids in endless rest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But good Aeneas rush’d amid the bands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bare was his head, and naked were his hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sign of truce: then thus he cries aloud:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What sudden rage, what new desire of blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inflames your alter’d minds? O Trojans, cease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From impious arms, nor violate the peace!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By human sanctions, and by laws divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The terms are all agreed; the war is mine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dismiss your fears, and let the fight ensue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This hand alone shall right the gods and you:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our injur’d altars, and their broken vow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To this avenging sword the faithless Turnus owe.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus while he spoke, unmindful of defence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A winged arrow struck the pious prince.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, whether from some human hand it came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or hostile god, is left unknown by fame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No human hand or hostile god was found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To boast the triumph of so base a wound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When Turnus saw the Trojan quit the plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His chiefs dismay’d, his troops a fainting train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ unhop’d event his heighten’d soul inspires:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At once his arms and coursers he requires;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, with a leap, his lofty chariot gains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with a ready hand assumes the reins.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He drives impetuous, and, where’er he goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He leaves behind a lane of slaughter’d foes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These his lance reaches; over those he rolls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His rapid car, and crushes out their souls:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain the vanquish’d fly; the victor sends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dead men’s weapons at their living friends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus, on the banks of Hebrus’ freezing flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The God of Battles, in his angry mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clashing his sword against his brazen shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let loose the reins, and scours along the field:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the wind his fiery coursers fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Groans the sad earth, resounds the rattling sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrath, Terror, Treason, Tumult, and Despair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Dire faces, and deform’d) surround the car;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Friends of the god, and followers of the war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fury not unlike, nor less disdain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exulting Turnus flies along the plain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His smoking horses, at their utmost speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lashes on, and urges o’er the dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their fetlocks run with blood; and, when they bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gore and gath’ring dust are dash’d around.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thamyris and Pholus, masters of the war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He kill’d at hand, but Sthenelus afar:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From far the sons of Imbracus he slew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glaucus and Lades, of the Lycian crew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both taught to fight on foot, in battle join’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or mount the courser that outstrips the wind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Meantime Eumedes, vaunting in the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New fir’d the Trojans, and their foes repell’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This son of Dolon bore his grandsire’s name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But emulated more his father’s fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His guileful father, sent a nightly spy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Grecian camp and order to descry:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hard enterprise! and well he might require</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles’ car and horses, for his hire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, met upon the scout, th’ Aetolian prince</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In death bestow’d a juster recompense.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fierce Turnus view’d the Trojan from afar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And launch’d his jav’lin from his lofty car;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then lightly leaping down, pursued the blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, pressing with his foot his prostrate foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrench’d from his feeble hold the shining sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plung’d it in the bosom of its lord.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Possess,” said he, “the fruit of all thy pains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And measure, at thy length, our Latian plains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus are my foes rewarded by my hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus may they build their town, and thus enjoy the land!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then Dares, Butes, Sybaris he slew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom o’er his neck his flound’ring courser threw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when loud Boreas, with his blust’ring train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stoops from above, incumbent on the main;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where’er he flies, he drives the rack before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rolls the billows on th’ Aegaean shore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, where resistless Turnus takes his course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The scatter’d squadrons bend before his force;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His crest of horses’ hair is blown behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By adverse air, and rustles in the wind.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This haughty Phegeus saw with high disdain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as the chariot roll’d along the plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Light from the ground he leapt, and seiz’d the rein.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus hung in air, he still retain’d his hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The coursers frighted, and their course controll’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lance of Turnus reach’d him as he hung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pierc’d his plated arms, but pass’d along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And only raz’d the skin. He turn’d, and held</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against his threat’ning foe his ample shield;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then call’d for aid: but, while he cried in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chariot bore him backward on the plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lies revers’d; the victor king descends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strikes so justly where his helmet ends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lops the head. The Latian fields are drunk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With streams that issue from the bleeding trunk.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>While he triumphs, and while the Trojans yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wounded prince is forc’d to leave the field:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strong Mnestheus, and Achates often tried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And young Ascanius, weeping by his side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conduct him to his tent. Scarce can he rear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His limbs from earth, supported on his spear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resolv’d in mind, regardless of the smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He tugs with both his hands, and breaks the dart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The steel remains. No readier way he found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To draw the weapon, than t’ inlarge the wound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eager of fight, impatient of delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He begs; and his unwilling friends obey.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Iapis was at hand to prove his art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose blooming youth so fir’d Apollo’s heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, for his love, he proffer’d to bestow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His tuneful harp and his unerring bow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pious youth, more studious how to save</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His aged sire, now sinking to the grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Preferr’d the pow’r of plants, and silent praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of healing arts, before Phoebean bays.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Propp’d on his lance the pensive hero stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heard and saw, unmov’d, the mourning crowd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fam’d physician tucks his robes around</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With ready hands, and hastens to the wound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With gentle touches he performs his part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This way and that, soliciting the dart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And exercises all his heav’nly art.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All soft’ning simples, known of sov’reign use,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He presses out, and pours their noble juice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These first infus’d, to lenify the pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He tugs with pincers, but he tugs in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to the patron of his art he pray’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The patron of his art refus’d his aid.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Meantime the war approaches to the tents;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ alarm grows hotter, and the noise augments:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The driving dust proclaims the danger near;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And first their friends, and then their foes appear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their friends retreat; their foes pursue the rear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The camp is fill’d with terror and affright:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hissing shafts within the trench alight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An undistinguish’d noise ascends the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shouts of those who kill, and groans of those who die.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But now the goddess mother, mov’d with grief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pierc’d with pity, hastens her relief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A branch of healing dittany she brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in the Cretan fields with care she sought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rough is the stern, which woolly leafs surround;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The leafs with flow’rs, the flow’rs with purple crown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well known to wounded goats; a sure relief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To draw the pointed steel, and ease the grief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Venus brings, in clouds involv’d, and brews</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ extracted liquor with ambrosian dews,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And odorous panacee. Unseen she stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Temp’ring the mixture with her heav’nly hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pours it in a bowl, already crown’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With juice of med’c’nal herbs prepar’d to bathe the wound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The leech, unknowing of superior art</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which aids the cure, with this foments the part;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a moment ceas’d the raging smart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stanch’d is the blood, and in the bottom stands:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The steel, but scarcely touch’d with tender hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moves up, and follows of its own accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And health and vigour are at once restor’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Iapis first perceiv’d the closing wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And first the footsteps of a god he found.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Arms! arms!” he cries; “the sword and shield prepare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And send the willing chief, renew’d, to war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is no mortal work, no cure of mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor art’s effect, but done by hands divine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some god our general to the battle sends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some god preserves his life for greater ends.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The hero arms in haste; his hands infold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His thighs with cuishes of refulgent gold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inflam’d to fight, and rushing to the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hand sustaining the celestial shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This gripes the lance, and with such vigour shakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That to the rest the beamy weapon quakes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with a close embrace he strain’d his son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, kissing thro’ his helmet, thus begun:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“My son, from my example learn the war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In camps to suffer, and in fields to dare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But happier chance than mine attend thy care!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This day my hand thy tender age shall shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crown with honours of the conquer’d field:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou, when thy riper years shall send thee forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To toils of war, be mindful of my worth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assert thy birthright, and in arms be known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Hector’s nephew, and Aeneas’ son.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said; and, striding, issued on the plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anteus and Mnestheus, and a num’rous train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attend his steps; the rest their weapons take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, crowding to the field, the camp forsake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cloud of blinding dust is rais’d around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Labours beneath their feet the trembling ground.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now Turnus, posted on a hill, from far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beheld the progress of the moving war:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With him the Latins view’d the cover’d plains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the chill blood ran backward in their veins.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juturna saw th’ advancing troops appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heard the hostile sound, and fled for fear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aeneas leads; and draws a sweeping train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clos’d in their ranks, and pouring on the plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when a whirlwind, rushing to the shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the mid ocean, drives the waves before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The painful hind with heavy heart foresees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flatted fields, and slaughter of the trees;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With like impetuous rage the prince appears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before his doubled front, nor less destruction bears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now both armies shock in open field;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Osiris is by strong Thymbraeus kill’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Archetius, Ufens, Epulon, are slain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(All fam’d in arms, and of the Latian train)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Gyas’, Mnestheus’, and Achates’ hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fatal augur falls, by whose command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The truce was broken, and whose lance, embrued</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Trojan blood, th’ unhappy fight renew’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loud shouts and clamours rend the liquid sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And o’er the field the frighted Latins fly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The prince disdains the dastards to pursue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor moves to meet in arms the fighting few;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turnus alone, amid the dusky plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He seeks, and to the combat calls in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juturna heard, and, seiz’d with mortal fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forc’d from the beam her brother’s charioteer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assumes his shape, his armour, and his mien,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, like Metiscus, in his seat is seen.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As the black swallow near the palace plies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er empty courts, and under arches, flies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now hawks aloft, now skims along the flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To furnish her loquacious nest with food:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So drives the rapid goddess o’er the plains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The smoking horses run with loosen’d reins.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She steers a various course among the foes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now here, now there, her conqu’ring brother shows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now with a straight, now with a wheeling flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She turns, and bends, but shuns the single fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aeneas, fir’d with fury, breaks the crowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seeks his foe, and calls by name aloud:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He runs within a narrower ring, and tries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stop the chariot; but the chariot flies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he but gain a glimpse, Juturna fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And far away the Daunian hero bears.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What should he do! Nor arts nor arms avail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And various cares in vain his mind assail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The great Messapus, thund’ring thro’ the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his left hand two pointed jav’lins held:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Encount’ring on the prince, one dart he drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with unerring aim and utmost vigour threw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aeneas saw it come, and, stooping low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath his buckler, shunn’d the threat’ning blow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The weapon hiss’d above his head, and tore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The waving plume which on his helm he wore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forced by this hostile act, and fir’d with spite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That flying Turnus still declin’d the fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Prince, whose piety had long repell’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His inborn ardour, now invades the field;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Invokes the pow’rs of violated peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their rites and injur’d altars to redress;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, to his rage abandoning the rein,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With blood and slaughter’d bodies fills the plain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>What god can tell, what numbers can display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The various labours of that fatal day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What chiefs and champions fell on either side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In combat slain, or by what deaths they died;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom Turnus, whom the Trojan hero kill’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who shar’d the fame and fortune of the field!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jove, could’st thou view, and not avert thy sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two jarring nations join’d in cruel fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom leagues of lasting love so shortly shall unite!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Aeneas first Rutulian Sucro found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose valour made the Trojans quit their ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt his ribs the jav’lin drove so just,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It reach’d his heart, nor needs a second thrust.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now Turnus, at two blows, two brethren slew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First from his horse fierce Amycus he threw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, leaping on the ground, on foot assail’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Diores, and in equal fight prevail’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their lifeless trunks he leaves upon the place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their heads, distilling gore, his chariot grace.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Three cold on earth the Trojan hero threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom without respite at one charge he slew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cethegus, Tanais, Tagus, fell oppress’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sad Onythes, added to the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Theban blood, whom Peridia bore.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Turnus two brothers from the Lycian shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from Apollo’s fane to battle sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erthrew; nor Phoebus could their fate prevent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peaceful Menoetes after these he kill’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who long had shunn’d the dangers of the field:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Lerna’s lake a silent life he led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with his nets and angle earn’d his bread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor pompous cares, nor palaces, he knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wisely from th’ infectious world withdrew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor was his house; his father’s painful hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discharg’d his rent, and plow’d another’s land.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As flames among the lofty woods are thrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On diff’rent sides, and both by winds are blown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The laurels crackle in the sputt’ring fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The frighted sylvans from their shades retire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or as two neighb’ring torrents fall from high;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rapid they run; the foamy waters fry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They roll to sea with unresisted force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And down the rocks precipitate their course:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not with less rage the rival heroes take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their diff’rent ways, nor less destruction make.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With spears afar, with swords at hand, they strike;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And zeal of slaughter fires their souls alike.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like them, their dauntless men maintain the field;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hearts are pierc’d, unknowing how to yield:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They blow for blow return, and wound for wound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heaps of bodies raise the level ground.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Murranus, boasting of his blood, that springs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From a long royal race of Latian kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is by the Trojan from his chariot thrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crush’d with the weight of an unwieldy stone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt the wheels he fell; the wheels, that bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His living load, his dying body tore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His starting steeds, to shun the glitt’ring sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paw down his trampled limbs, forgetful of their lord.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Fierce Hyllus threaten’d high, and, face to face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Affronted Turnus in the middle space:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The prince encounter’d him in full career,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And at his temples aim’d the deadly spear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fatally the flying weapon sped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thro’ his brazen helm it pierc’d his head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor, Cisseus, couldst thou scape from Turnus’ hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain the strongest of th’ Arcadian band:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor to Cupentus could his gods afford</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Availing aid against th’ Aenean sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to his naked heart pursued the course;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor could his plated shield sustain the force.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Iolas fell, whom not the Grecian pow’rs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor great subverter of the Trojan tow’rs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were doom’d to kill, while Heav’n prolong’d his date;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But who can pass the bounds, prefix’d by fate?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In high Lyrnessus, and in Troy, he held</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two palaces, and was from each expell’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the mighty man, the last remains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little spot of foreign earth contains.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now both hosts their broken troops unite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In equal ranks, and mix in mortal fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seresthus and undaunted Mnestheus join</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Trojan, Tuscan, and Arcadian line:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sea-born Messapus, with Atinas, heads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Latin squadrons, and to battle leads.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They strike, they push, they throng the scanty space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resolv’d on death, impatient of disgrace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, where one falls, another fills his place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Cyprian goddess now inspires her son</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To leave th’ unfinish’d fight, and storm the town:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, while he rolls his eyes around the plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In quest of Turnus, whom he seeks in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He views th’ unguarded city from afar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In careless quiet, and secure of war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Occasion offers, and excites his mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dare beyond the task he first design’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resolv’d, he calls his chiefs; they leave the fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attended thus, he takes a neighb’ring height;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The crowding troops about their gen’ral stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All under arms, and wait his high command.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then thus the lofty prince: “Hear and obey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye Trojan bands, without the least delay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jove is with us; and what I have decreed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Requires our utmost vigour, and our speed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your instant arms against the town prepare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The source of mischief, and the seat of war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This day the Latian tow’rs, that mate the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall level with the plain in ashes lie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The people shall be slaves, unless in time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They kneel for pardon, and repent their crime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twice have our foes been vanquish’d on the plain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then shall I wait till Turnus will be slain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your force against the perjur’d city bend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There it began, and there the war shall end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The peace profan’d our rightful arms requires;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cleanse the polluted place with purging fires.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He finish’d; and, one soul inspiring all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Form’d in a wedge, the foot approach the wall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without the town, an unprovided train</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of gaping, gazing citizens are slain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some firebrands, others scaling ladders bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And those they toss aloft, and these they rear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flames now launch’d, the feather’d arrows fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And clouds of missive arms obscure the sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Advancing to the front, the hero stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, stretching out to heav’n his pious hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attests the gods, asserts his innocence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upbraids with breach of faith th’ Ausonian prince;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Declares the royal honour doubly stain’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And twice the rites of holy peace profan’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Dissenting clamours in the town arise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each will be heard, and all at once advise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One part for peace, and one for war contends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some would exclude their foes, and some admit their friends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The helpless king is hurried in the throng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, whate’er tide prevails, is borne along.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus, when the swain, within a hollow rock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Invades the bees with suffocating smoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They run around, or labour on their wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Disus’d to flight, and shoot their sleepy stings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shun the bitter fumes in vain they try;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Black vapours, issuing from the vent, involve the sky.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But fate and envious fortune now prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To plunge the Latins in the last despair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The queen, who saw the foes invade the town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brands on tops of burning houses thrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cast round her eyes, distracted with her fear⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No troops of Turnus in the field appear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once more she stares abroad, but still in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then concludes the royal youth is slain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mad with her anguish, impotent to bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mighty grief, she loathes the vital air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She calls herself the cause of all this ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And owns the dire effects of her ungovern’d will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She raves against the gods; she beats her breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She tears with both her hands her purple vest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then round a beam a running noose she tied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, fasten’d by the neck, obscenely died.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soon as the fatal news by Fame was blown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to her dames and to her daughter known,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sad Lavinia rends her yellow hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rosy cheeks; the rest her sorrow share:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With shrieks the palace rings, and madness of despair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spreading rumour fills the public place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confusion, fear, distraction, and disgrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And silent shame, are seen in ev’ry face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Latinus tears his garments as he goes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both for his public and his private woes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With filth his venerable beard besmears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sordid dust deforms his silver hairs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And much he blames the softness of his mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obnoxious to the charms of womankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And soon seduc’d to change what he so well design’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To break the solemn league so long desir’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor finish what his fates, and those of Troy, requir’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now Turnus rolls aloof o’er empty plains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And here and there some straggling foes he gleans.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His flying coursers please him less and less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Asham’d of easy fight and cheap success.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus half-contented, anxious in his mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The distant cries come driving in the wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shouts from the walls, but shouts in murmurs drown’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A jarring mixture, and a boding sound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Alas!” said he, “what mean these dismal cries?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What doleful clamours from the town arise?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confus’d, he stops, and backward pulls the reins.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She who the driver’s office now sustains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Replies: “Neglect, my lord, these new alarms;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here fight, and urge the fortune of your arms:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There want not others to defend the wall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If by your rival’s hand th’ Italians fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So shall your fatal sword his friends oppress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In honour equal, equal in success.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>To this, the prince: “O sister⁠—for I knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The peace infring’d proceeded first from you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I knew you, when you mingled first in fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now in vain you would deceive my sight⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why, goddess, this unprofitable care?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who sent you down from heav’n, involv’d in air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your share of mortal sorrows to sustain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And see your brother bleeding on the plain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For to what pow’r can Turnus have recourse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or how resist his fate’s prevailing force?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These eyes beheld Murranus bite the ground:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mighty the man, and mighty was the wound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I heard my dearest friend, with dying breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My name invoking to revenge his death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brave Ufens fell with honour on the place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shun the shameful sight of my disgrace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On earth supine, a manly corpse he lies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His vest and armour are the victor’s prize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, shall I see Laurentum in a flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which only wanted, to complete my shame?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How will the Latins hoot their champion’s flight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How Drances will insult and point them to the sight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is death so hard to bear? Ye gods below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Since those above so small compassion show,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receive a soul unsullied yet with shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which not belies my great forefather’s name!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>He said; and while he spoke, with flying speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came Sages urging on his foamy steed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fix’d on his wounded face a shaft he bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, seeking Turnus, sent his voice before:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Turnus, on you, on you alone, depends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our last relief: compassionate your friends!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like lightning, fierce Aeneas, rolling on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With arms invests, with flames invades the town:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brands are toss’d on high; the winds conspire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To drive along the deluge of the fire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All eyes are fix’d on you: your foes rejoice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ev’n the king staggers, and suspends his choice;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doubts to deliver or defend the town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom to reject, or whom to call his son.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The queen, on whom your utmost hopes were plac’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Herself suborning death, has breath’d her last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis true, Messapus, fearless of his fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fierce Atinas’ aid, defends the gate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On ev’ry side surrounded by the foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more they kill, the greater numbers grow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An iron harvest mounts, and still remains to mow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You, far aloof from your forsaken bands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your rolling chariot drive o’er empty sands.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Stupid he sate, his eyes on earth declin’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And various cares revolving in his mind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rage, boiling from the bottom of his breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sorrow mix’d with shame, his soul oppress’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And conscious worth lay lab’ring in his thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And love by jealousy to madness wrought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By slow degrees his reason drove away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mists of passion, and resum’d her sway.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, rising on his car, he turn’d his look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saw the town involv’d in fire and smoke.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wooden tow’r with flames already blaz’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which his own hands on beams and rafters rais’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bridges laid above to join the space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wheels below to roll from place to place.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sister, the Fates have vanquish’d: let us go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The way which Heav’n and my hard fortune show.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fight is fix’d; nor shall the branded name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a base coward blot your brother’s fame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death is my choice; but suffer me to try</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My force, and vent my rage before I die.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said; and, leaping down without delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thro’ crowds of scatter’d foes he freed his way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Striding he pass’d, impetuous as the wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And left the grieving goddess far behind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when a fragment, from a mountain torn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By raging tempests, or by torrents borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or sapp’d by time, or loosen’d from the roots⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prone thro’ the void the rocky ruin shoots,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rolling from crag to crag, from steep to steep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down sink, at once, the shepherds and their sheep:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Involv’d alike, they rush to nether ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stunn’d with the shock they fall, and stunn’d from earth rebound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Turnus, hasting headlong to the town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should’ring and shoving, bore the squadrons down.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still pressing onward, to the walls he drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where shafts, and spears, and darts promiscuous flew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sanguine streams the slipp’ry ground embrue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First stretching out his arm, in sign of peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cries aloud, to make the combat cease:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Rutulians, hold; and Latin troops, retire!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fight is mine; and me the gods require.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis just that I should vindicate alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The broken truce, or for the breach atone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This day shall free from wars th’ Ausonian state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or finish my misfortunes in my fate.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Both armies from their bloody work desist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, bearing backward, form a spacious list.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Trojan hero, who receiv’d from fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The welcome sound, and heard the champion’s name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon leaves the taken works and mounted walls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Greedy of war where greater glory calls.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He springs to fight, exulting in his force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His jointed armour rattles in the course.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Eryx, or like Athos, great he shows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Father Apennine, when, white with snows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His head divine obscure in clouds he hides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shakes the sounding forest on his sides.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nations, overaw’d, surcease the fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immovable their bodies, fix’d their sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ev’n death stands still; nor from above they throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their darts, nor drive their batt’ring-rams below.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In silent order either army stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drop their swords, unknowing, from their hands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ Ausonian king beholds, with wond’ring sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two mighty champions match’d in single fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Born under climes remote, and brought by fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With swords to try their titles to the state.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, in clos’d field, each other from afar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They view; and, rushing on, begin the war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They launch their spears; then hand to hand they meet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The trembling soil resounds beneath their feet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their bucklers clash; thick blows descend from high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And flakes of fire from their hard helmets fly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Courage conspires with chance, and both engage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With equal fortune yet, and mutual rage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As when two bulls for their fair female fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Sila’s shades, or on Taburnus’ height;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With horns adverse they meet; the keeper flies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mute stands the herd; the heifers roll their eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wait th’ event; which victor they shall bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And who shall be the lord, to rule the lusty year:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With rage of love the jealous rivals burn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And push for push, and wound for wound return;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their dewlaps gor’d, their sides are lav’d in blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loud cries and roaring sounds rebellow thro’ the wood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such was the combat in the listed ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So clash their swords, and so their shields resound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Jove sets the beam; in either scale he lays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The champions’ fate, and each exactly weighs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On this side, life and lucky chance ascends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loaded with death, that other scale descends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rais’d on the stretch, young Turnus aims a blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full on the helm of his unguarded foe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shrill shouts and clamours ring on either side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As hopes and fears their panting hearts divide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all in pieces flies the traitor sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in the middle stroke, deserts his lord.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now is but death, or flight; disarm’d he flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When in his hand an unknown hilt he spies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fame says that Turnus, when his steeds he join’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hurrying to war, disorder’d in his mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Snatch’d the first weapon which his haste could find.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas not the fated sword his father bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that his charioteer Metiscus wore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This, while the Trojans fled, the toughness held;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, vain against the great Vulcanian shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mortal-temper’d steel deceiv’d his hand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shiver’d fragments shone amid the sand.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Surpris’d with fear, he fled along the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now forthright, and now in orbits wheel’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For here the Trojan troops the list surround,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there the pass is clos’d with pools and marshy ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aeneas hastens, tho’ with heavier pace⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wound, so newly knit, retards the chase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oft his trembling knees their aid refuse⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, pressing foot by foot, his foe pursues.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus, when a fearful stag is clos’d around</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With crimson toils, or in a river found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High on the bank the deep-mouth’d hound appears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still opening, following still, where’er he steers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The persecuted creature, to and fro,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turns here and there, to scape his Umbrian foe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Steep is th’ ascent, and, if he gains the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The purple death is pitch’d along the strand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eager foe, determin’d to the chase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stretch’d at his length, gains ground at ev’ry pace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now to his beamy head he makes his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now he holds, or thinks he holds, his prey:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just at the pinch, the stag springs out with fear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He bites the wind, and fills his sounding jaws with air:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rocks, the lakes, the meadows ring with cries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mortal tumult mounts, and thunders in the skies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus flies the Daunian prince, and, flying, blames</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His tardy troops, and, calling by their names,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Demands his trusty sword. The Trojan threats</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The realm with ruin, and their ancient seats</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lay in ashes, if they dare supply</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With arms or aid his vanquish’d enemy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus menacing, he still pursues the course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With vigour, tho’ diminish’d of his force.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ten times already round the listed place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One chief had fled, and t’ other giv’n the chase:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No trivial prize is play’d; for on the life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or death of Turnus now depends the strife.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Within the space, an olive tree had stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sacred shade, a venerable wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For vows to Faunus paid, the Latins’ guardian god.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here hung the vests, and tablets were engrav’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sinking mariners from shipwreck sav’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With heedless hands the Trojans fell’d the tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make the ground enclos’d for combat free.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep in the root, whether by fate, or chance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or erring haste, the Trojan drove his lance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then stoop’d, and tugg’d with force immense, to free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ incumber’d spear from the tenacious tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, whom his fainting limbs pursued in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His flying weapon might from far attain.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Confus’d with fear, bereft of human aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Turnus to the gods, and first to Faunus pray’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O Faunus, pity! and thou Mother Earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where I thy foster son receiv’d my birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hold fast the steel! If my religious hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your plant has honour’d, which your foes profan’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Propitious hear my pious pray’r!” He said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor with successless vows invok’d their aid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ incumbent hero wrench’d, and pull’d, and strain’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still the stubborn earth the steel detain’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juturna took her time; and, while in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He strove, assum’d Meticus’ form again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in that imitated shape, restor’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the despairing prince his Daunian sword.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Queen of Love, who, with disdain and grief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw the bold nymph afford this prompt relief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>T’ assert her offspring with a greater deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the tough root the ling’ring weapon freed.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Once more erect, the rival chiefs advance:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One trusts the sword, and one the pointed lance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And both resolv’d alike to try their fatal chance.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Meantime imperial Jove to Juno spoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who from a shining cloud beheld the shock:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What new arrest, O Queen of Heav’n, is sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stop the Fates now lab’ring in th’ event?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What farther hopes are left thee to pursue?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Divine Aeneas, (and thou know’st it too,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foredoom’d, to these celestial seats are due.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What more attempts for Turnus can be made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That thus thou ling’rest in this lonely shade?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it becoming of the due respect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And awful honour of a god elect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wound unworthy of our state to feel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Patient of human hands and earthly steel?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or seems it just, the sister should restore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A second sword, when one was lost before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And arm a conquer’d wretch against his conqueror?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For what, without thy knowledge and avow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nay more, thy dictate, durst Juturna do?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last, in deference to my love, forbear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lodge within thy soul this anxious care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reclin’d upon my breast, thy grief unload:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who should relieve the goddess, but the god?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now all things to their utmost issue tend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Push’d by the Fates to their appointed end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While leave was giv’n thee, and a lawful hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For vengeance, wrath, and unresisted pow’r,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Toss’d on the seas, thou couldst thy foes distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, driv’n ashore, with hostile arms oppress;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deform the royal house; and, from the side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the just bridegroom, tear the plighted bride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now cease at my command.” The Thund’rer said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, with dejected eyes, this answer Juno made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Because your dread decree too well I knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Turnus and from earth unwilling I withdrew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Else should you not behold me here, alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Involv’d in empty clouds, my friends bemoan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, girt with vengeful flames, in open sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Engag’d against my foes in mortal fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis true, Juturna mingled in the strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By my command, to save her brother’s life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At least to try; but, by the Stygian lake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(The most religious oath the gods can take,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With this restriction, not to bend the bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or toss the spear, or trembling dart to throw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now, resign’d to your superior might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tir’d with fruitless toils, I loathe the fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This let me beg (and this no fates withstand)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both for myself and for your father’s land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, when the nuptial bed shall bind the peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Which I, since you ordain, consent to bless,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The laws of either nation be the same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let the Latins still retain their name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Speak the same language which they spoke before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wear the same habits which their grandsires wore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call them not Trojans: perish the renown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And name of Troy, with that detested town.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Latium be Latium still; let Alba reign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Rome’s immortal majesty remain.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then thus the founder of mankind replies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Unruffled was his front, serene his eyes)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Can Saturn’s issue, and heav’n’s other heir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such endless anger in her bosom bear?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be mistress, and your full desires obtain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But quench the choler you foment in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From ancient blood th’ Ausonian people sprung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall keep their name, their habit, and their tongue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Trojans to their customs shall be tied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will, myself, their common rites provide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The natives shall command, the foreigners subside.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All shall be Latium; Troy without a name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her lost sons forget from whence they came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From blood so mix’d, a pious race shall flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Equal to gods, excelling all below.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No nation more respect to you shall pay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or greater off’rings on your altars lay.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juno consents, well pleas’d that her desires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had found success, and from the cloud retires.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The peace thus made, the Thund’rer next prepares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To force the wat’ry goddess from the wars.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep in the dismal regions void of light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three daughters at a birth were born to Night:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These their brown mother, brooding on her care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indued with windy wings to flit in air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With serpents girt alike, and crown’d with hissing hair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In heav’n the Dirae call’d, and still at hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the throne of angry Jove they stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His ministers of wrath, and ready still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The minds of mortal men with fears to fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whene’er the moody sire, to wreak his hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On realms or towns deserving of their fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hurls down diseases, death and deadly care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And terrifies the guilty world with war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One sister plague if these from heav’n he sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fright Juturna with a dire portent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pest comes whirling down: by far more slow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Springs the swift arrow from the Parthian bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Cydon yew, when, traversing the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drench’d in pois’nous juice, the sure destruction flies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such a sudden and unseen a flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shot thro’ the clouds the daughter of the night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon as the field inclos’d she had in view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from afar her destin’d quarry knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Contracted, to the boding bird she turns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which haunts the ruin’d piles and hallow’d urns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And beats about the tombs with nightly wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where songs obscene on sepulchers she sings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus lessen’d in her form, with frightful cries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Fury round unhappy Turnus flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flaps on his shield, and flutters o’er his eyes.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A lazy chillness crept along his blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chok’d was his voice; his hair with horror stood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juturna from afar beheld her fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knew th’ ill omen, by her screaming cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stridor of her wings. Amaz’d with fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her beauteous breast she beat, and rent her flowing hair.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Ah me!” she cries, “in this unequal strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What can thy sister more to save thy life?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weak as I am, can I, alas! contend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In arms with that inexorable fiend?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, now, I quit the field! forbear to fright</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My tender soul, ye baleful birds of night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lashing of your wings I know too well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sounding flight, and fun’ral screams of hell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These are the gifts you bring from haughty Jove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The worthy recompense of ravish’d love!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Did he for this exempt my life from fate?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O hard conditions of immortal state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tho’ born to death, not privileg’d to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But forc’d to bear impos’d eternity!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take back your envious bribes, and let me go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Companion to my brother’s ghost below!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The joys are vanish’d: nothing now remains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of life immortal, but immortal pains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What earth will open her devouring womb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To rest a weary goddess in the tomb!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She drew a length of sighs; nor more she said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in her azure mantle wrapp’d her head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then plung’d into her stream, with deep despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her last sobs came bubbling up in air.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now stern Aeneas his weighty spear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against his foe, and thus upbraids his fear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What farther subterfuge can Turnus find?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What empty hopes are harbour’d in his mind?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis not thy swiftness can secure thy flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not with their feet, but hands, the valiant fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vary thy shape in thousand forms, and dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What skill and courage can attempt in war;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wish for the wings of winds, to mount the sky;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or hid, within the hollow earth to lie!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The champion shook his head, and made this short reply:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“No threats of thine my manly mind can move;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis hostile heav’n I dread, and partial Jove.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said no more, but, with a sigh, repress’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mighty sorrow in his swelling breast.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then, as he roll’d his troubled eyes around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An antique stone he saw, the common bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of neighb’ring fields, and barrier of the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So vast, that twelve strong men of modern days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ enormous weight from earth could hardly raise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He heav’d it at a lift, and, pois’d on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ran stagg’ring on against his enemy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But so disorder’d, that he scarcely knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His way, or what unwieldly weight he threw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His knocking knees are bent beneath the load,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shiv’ring cold congeals his vital blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stone drops from his arms, and, falling short</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For want of vigour, mocks his vain effort.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as, when heavy sleep has clos’d the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sickly fancy labours in the night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We seem to run; and, destitute of force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our sinking limbs forsake us in the course:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain we heave for breath; in vain we cry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nerves, unbrac’d, their usual strength deny;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the tongue the falt’ring accents die:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Turnus far’d; whatever means he tried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All force of arms and points of art employ’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Fury flew athwart, and made th’ endeavor void.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A thousand various thoughts his soul confound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He star’d about, nor aid nor issue found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His own men stop the pass, and his own walls surround.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Once more he pauses, and looks out again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seeks the goddess charioteer in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trembling he views the thund’ring chief advance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brandishing aloft the deadly lance:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amaz’d he cow’rs beneath his conqu’ring foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgets to ward, and waits the coming blow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Astonish’d while he stands, and fix’d with fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aim’d at his shield he sees th’ impending spear.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The hero measur’d first, with narrow view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The destin’d mark; and, rising as he threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With its full swing the fatal weapon flew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not with less rage the rattling thunder falls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or stones from batt’ring-engines break the walls:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift as a whirlwind, from an arm so strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lance drove on, and bore the death along.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Naught could his sev’nfold shield the prince avail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor aught, beneath his arms, the coat of mail:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It pierc’d thro’ all, and with a grisly wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transfix’d his thigh, and doubled him to ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With groans the Latins rend the vaulted sky:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woods, hills, and valleys, to the voice reply.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now low on earth the lofty chief is laid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With eyes cast upward, and with arms display’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, recreant, thus to the proud victor pray’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I know my death deserv’d, nor hope to live:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Use what the gods and thy good fortune give.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet think, O think, if mercy may be shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hadst a father once, and hast a son.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pity my sire, now sinking to the grave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for Anchises’ sake old Daunus save!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, if thy vow’d revenge pursue my death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give to my friends my body void of breath!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Latian chiefs have seen me beg my life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine is the conquest, thine the royal wife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against a yielded man, ’tis mean ignoble strife.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>In deep suspense the Trojan seem’d to stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, just prepar’d to strike, repress’d his hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He roll’d his eyes, and ev’ry moment felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His manly soul with more compassion melt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, casting down a casual glance, he spied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The golden belt that glitter’d on his side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fatal spoils which haughty Turnus tore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From dying Pallas, and in triumph wore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, rous’d anew to wrath, he loudly cries</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Flames, while he spoke, came flashing from his eyes)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Traitor, dost thou, dost thou to grace pretend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clad, as thou art, in trophies of my friend?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To his sad soul a grateful off’ring go!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis Pallas, Pallas gives this deadly blow.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rais’d his arm aloft, and, at the word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deep in his bosom drove the shining sword.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The streaming blood distain’d his arms around;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the disdainful soul came rushing through the wound.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
