<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Book XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Book</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="argument-11" epub:type="preamble">
				<header>
					<p>The Argument</p>
				</header>
				<p>Aeneas erects a trophy of the spoils of Mezentius, grants a truce for burying the dead, and sends home the body of Pallas with great solemnity. Latinus calls a council, to propose offers of peace to Aeneas; which occasions great animosity betwixt Turnus and Drances. In the mean time there is a sharp engagement of the horse; wherein Camilla signalizes herself, is killed, and the Latine troops are entirely defeated.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="poem-11" epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>Scarce had the rosy Morning rais’d her head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above the waves, and left her wat’ry bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pious chief, whom double cares attend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For his unburied soldiers and his friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet first to Heav’n perform’d a victor’s vows:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He bar’d an ancient oak of all her boughs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then on a rising ground the trunk he plac’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which with the spoils of his dead foe he grac’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The coat of arms by proud Mezentius worn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now on a naked snag in triumph borne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was hung on high, and glitter’d from afar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A trophy sacred to the God of War.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above his arms, fix’d on the leafless wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appear’d his plumy crest, besmear’d with blood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His brazen buckler on the left was seen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truncheons of shiver’d lances hung between;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the right was placed his corslet, bor’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And to the neck was tied his unavailing sword.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A crowd of chiefs inclose the godlike man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who thus, conspicuous in the midst, began:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Our toils, my friends, are crown’d with sure success;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The greater part perform’d, achieve the less.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now follow cheerful to the trembling town;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Press but an entrance, and presume it won.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fear is no more, for fierce Mezentius lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the first fruits of war, a sacrifice.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turnus shall fall extended on the plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in this omen, is already slain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prepar’d in arms, pursue your happy chance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That none unwarn’d may plead his ignorance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, at Heav’n’s appointed hour, may find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your warlike ensigns waving in the wind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime the rites and fun’ral pomps prepare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Due to your dead companions of the war:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The last respect the living can bestow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shield their shadows from contempt below.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That conquer’d earth be theirs, for which they fought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And which for us with their own blood they bought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But first the corpse of our unhappy friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the sad city of Evander send,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, not inglorious, in his age’s bloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was hurried hence by too severe a doom.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus, weeping while he spoke, he took his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, new in death, lamented Pallas lay.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Acoetes watch’d the corpse; whose youth deserv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The father’s trust; and now the son he serv’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With equal faith, but less auspicious care.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ attendants of the slain his sorrow share.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A troop of Trojans mix’d with these appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mourning matrons with dishevel’d hair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon as the prince appears, they raise a cry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All beat their breasts, and echoes rend the sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They rear his drooping forehead from the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, when Aeneas view’d the grisly wound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Pallas in his manly bosom bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the fair flesh distain’d with purple gore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First, melting into tears, the pious man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deplor’d so sad a sight, then thus began:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Unhappy youth! when Fortune gave the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my full wishes, she refus’d the best!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She came; but brought not thee along, to bless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My longing eyes, and share in my success:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She grudg’d thy safe return, the triumphs due</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prosp’rous valour, in the public view.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not thus I promis’d, when thy father lent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy needless succour with a sad consent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Embrac’d me, parting for th’ Etrurian land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sent me to possess a large command.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He warn’d, and from his own experience told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our foes were warlike, disciplin’d, and bold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now perhaps, in hopes of thy return,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rich odors on his loaded altars burn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While we, with vain officious pomp, prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To send him back his portion of the war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bloody breathless body, which can owe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No farther debt, but to the pow’rs below.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wretched father, ere his race is run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall view the fun’ral honours of his son.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These are my triumphs of the Latian war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fruits of my plighted faith and boasted care!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet, unhappy sire, thou shalt not see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A son whose death disgrac’d his ancestry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou shalt not blush, old man, however griev’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy Pallas no dishonest wound receiv’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He died no death to make thee wish, too late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hadst not liv’d to see his shameful fate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what a champion has th’ Ausonian coast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what a friend hast thou, Ascanius, lost!”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus having mourn’d, he gave the word around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To raise the breathless body from the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chose a thousand horse, the flow’r of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His warlike troops, to wait the funeral,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bear him back and share Evander’s grief:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A well-becoming, but a weak relief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of oaken twigs they twist an easy bier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then on their shoulders the sad burden rear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The body on this rural hearse is borne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strew’d leaves and funeral greens the bier adorn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All pale he lies, and looks a lovely flow’r,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New cropp’d by virgin hands, to dress the bow’r:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unfaded yet, but yet unfed below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more to mother earth or the green stern shall owe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then two fair vests, of wondrous work and cost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of purple woven, and with gold emboss’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For ornament the Trojan hero brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which with her hands Sidonian Dido wrought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One vest array’d the corpse; and one they spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er his clos’d eyes, and wrapp’d around his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, when the yellow hair in flame should fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The catching fire might burn the golden caul.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, the spoils of foes in battle slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he descended on the Latian plain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arms, trappings, horses, by the hearse are led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In long array—th’ achievements of the dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, pinion’d with their hands behind, appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ unhappy captives, marching in the rear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appointed off’rings in the victor’s name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sprinkle with their blood the fun’ral flame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inferior trophies by the chiefs are borne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gauntlets and helms their loaded hands adorn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fair inscriptions fix’d, and titles read</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Latian leaders conquer’d by the dead.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Acoetes on his pupil’s corpse attends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With feeble steps, supported by his friends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pausing at ev’ry pace, in sorrow drown’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt their arms he sinks upon the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where grov’ling while he lies in deep despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He beats his breast, and rends his hoary hair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The champion’s chariot next is seen to roll,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besmear’d with hostile blood, and honourably foul.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To close the pomp, Aethon, the steed of state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is led, the fun’rals of his lord to wait.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stripp’d of his trappings, with a sullen pace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He walks; and the big tears run rolling down his face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lance of Pallas, and the crimson crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are borne behind: the victor seiz’d the rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The march begins: the trumpets hoarsely sound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pikes and lances trail along the ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus while the Trojan and Arcadian horse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Pallantean tow’rs direct their course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In long procession rank’d, the pious chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stopp’d in the rear, and gave a vent to grief:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The public care,” he said, “which war attends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Diverts our present woes, at least suspends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peace with the manes of great Pallas dwell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hail, holy relics! and a last farewell!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said no more, but, inly thro’ he mourn’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Restrained his tears, and to the camp return’d.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now suppliants, from Laurentum sent, demand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A truce, with olive branches in their hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Obtest his clemency, and from the plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beg leave to draw the bodies of their slain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They plead, that none those common rites deny</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To conquer’d foes that in fair battle die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All cause of hate was ended in their death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor could he war with bodies void of breath.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A king, they hop’d, would hear a king’s request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose son he once was call’d, and once his guest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Their suit, which was too just to be denied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hero grants, and farther thus replied:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O Latian princes, how severe a fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In causeless quarrels has involv’d your state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And arm’d against an unoffending man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who sought your friendship ere the war began!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You beg a truce, which I would gladly give,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not only for the slain, but those who live.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I came not hither but by Heav’n’s command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sent by fate to share the Latian land.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor wage I wars unjust: your king denied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My proffer’d friendship, and my promis’d bride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left me for Turnus. Turnus then should try</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His cause in arms, to conquer or to die.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My right and his are in dispute: the slain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell without fault, our quarrel to maintain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In equal arms let us alone contend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let him vanquish, whom his fates befriend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This is the way (so tell him) to possess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The royal virgin, and restore the peace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bear this message back, with ample leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That your slain friends may fun’ral rites receive.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus having said—th’ embassadors, amaz’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood mute a while, and on each other gaz’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drances, their chief, who harbour’d in his breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long hate to Turnus, as his foe profess’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broke silence first, and to the godlike man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With graceful action bowing, thus began:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Auspicious prince, in arms a mighty name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yet whose actions far transcend your fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would I your justice or your force express,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thought can but equal; and all words are less.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your answer we shall thankfully relate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And favours granted to the Latian state.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If wish’d success our labour shall attend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think peace concluded, and the king your friend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let Turnus leave the realm to your command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seek alliance in some other land:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Build you the city which your fates assign;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We shall be proud in the great work to join.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus Drances; and his words so well persuade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest impower’d, that soon a truce is made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twelve days the term allow’d: and, during those,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Latians and Trojans, now no longer foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mix’d in the woods, for fun’ral piles prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fell the timber, and forget the war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loud axes thro’ the groaning groves resound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oak, mountain ash, and poplar spread the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First fall from high; and some the trunks receive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In loaden wains; with wedges some they cleave.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>And now the fatal news by Fame is blown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thro’ the short circuit of th’ Arcadian town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Pallas slain—by Fame, which just before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His triumphs on distended pinions bore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rushing from out the gate, the people stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each with a fun’ral flambeau in his hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wildly they stare, distracted with amaze:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fields are lighten’d with a fiery blaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That cast a sullen splendour on their friends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The marching troop which their dead prince attends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both parties meet: they raise a doleful cry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The matrons from the walls with shrieks reply,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their mix’d mourning rends the vaulted sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The town is fill’d with tumult and with tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till the loud clamours reach Evander’s ears:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgetful of his state, he runs along,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a disorder’d pace, and cleaves the throng;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Falls on the corpse; and groaning there he lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With silent grief, that speaks but at his eyes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Short sighs and sobs succeed; till sorrow breaks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A passage, and at once he weeps and speaks:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“O Pallas! thou hast fail’d thy plighted word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fight with caution, not to tempt the sword!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I warn’d thee, but in vain; for well I knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What perils youthful ardour would pursue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That boiling blood would carry thee too far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young as thou wert in dangers, raw to war!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O curst essay of arms, disastrous doom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prelude of bloody fields, and fights to come!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hard elements of unauspicious war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vain vows to Heav’n, and unavailing care!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrice happy thou, dear partner of my bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose holy soul the stroke of Fortune fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prescious of ills, and leaving me behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To drink the dregs of life by fate assign’d!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the goal of nature I have gone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Pallas late set out, but reach’d too soon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If, for my league against th’ Ausonian state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amidst their weapons I had found my fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Deserv’d from them,) then I had been return’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A breathless victor, and my son had mourn’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet will I not my Trojan friend upbraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor grudge th’ alliance I so gladly made.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas not his fault, my Pallas fell so young,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But my own crime, for having liv’d too long.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, since the gods had destin’d him to die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At least he led the way to victory:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First for his friends he won the fatal shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sent whole herds of slaughter’d foes before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A death too great, too glorious to deplore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor will I add new honours to thy grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Content with those the Trojan hero gave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That funeral pomp thy Phrygian friends design’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which the Tuscan chiefs and army join’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great spoils and trophies, gain’d by thee, they bear:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then let thy own achievements be thy share.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even thou, O Turnus, hadst a trophy stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose mighty trunk had better grac’d the wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Pallas had arriv’d, with equal length</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of years, to match thy bulk with equal strength.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But why, unhappy man, dost thou detain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These troops, to view the tears thou shedd’st in vain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go, friends, this message to your lord relate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tell him, that, if I bear my bitter fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, after Pallas’ death, live ling’ring on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis to behold his vengeance for my son.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I stay for Turnus, whose devoted head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is owing to the living and the dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My son and I expect it from his hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis all that he can give, or we demand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Joy is no more; but I would gladly go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To greet my Pallas with such news below.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The morn had now dispell’d the shades of night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Restoring toils, when she restor’d the light.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Trojan king and Tuscan chief command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To raise the piles along the winding strand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their friends convey the dead fun’ral fires;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Black smould’ring smoke from the green wood expires;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The light of heav’n is chok’d, and the new day retires.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then thrice around the kindled piles they go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For ancient custom had ordain’d it so)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrice horse and foot about the fires are led;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thrice, with loud laments, they hail the dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tears, trickling down their breasts, bedew the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drums and trumpets mix their mournful sound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amid the blaze, their pious brethren throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spoils, in battle taken from the foe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Helms, bits emboss’d, and swords of shining steel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One casts a target, one a chariot wheel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some to their fellows their own arms restore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The falchions which in luckless fight they bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their bucklers pierc’d, their darts bestow’d in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shiver’d lances gather’d from the plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whole herds of offer’d bulls, about the fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bristled boars, and woolly sheep expire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around the piles a careful troop attends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To watch the wasting flames, and weep their burning friends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ling’ring along the shore, till dewy night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New decks the face of heav’n with starry light.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The conquer’d Latians, with like pious care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Piles without number for their dead prepare.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Part in the places where they fell are laid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And part are to the neighb’ring fields convey’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The corps of kings, and captains of renown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Borne off in state, are buried in the town;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest, unhonour’d, and without a name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are cast a common heap to feed the flame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trojans and Latians vie with like desires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make the field of battle shine with fires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the promiscuous blaze to heav’n aspires.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now had the morning thrice renew’d the light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thrice dispell’d the shadows of the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When those who round the wasted fires remain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perform the last sad office to the slain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They rake the yet warm ashes from below;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These, and the bones unburn’d, in earth bestow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These relics with their country rites they grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And raise a mount of turf to mark the place.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But, in the palace of the king, appears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A scene more solemn, and a pomp of tears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maids, matrons, widows, mix their common moans;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Orphans their sires, and sires lament their sons.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All in that universal sorrow share,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And curse the cause of this unhappy war:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A broken league, a bride unjustly sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A crown usurp’d, which with their blood is bought!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These are the crimes with which they load the name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Turnus, and on him alone exclaim:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Let him who lords it o’er th’ Ausonian land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Engage the Trojan hero hand to hand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His is the gain; our lot is but to serve;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis just, the sway he seeks, he should deserve.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This Drances aggravates; and adds, with spite:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“His foe expects, and dares him to the fight.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor Turnus wants a party, to support</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His cause and credit in the Latian court.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His former acts secure his present fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the queen shades him with her mighty name.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>While thus their factious minds with fury burn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The legates from th’ Aetolian prince return:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad news they bring, that, after all the cost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And care employ’d, their embassy is lost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Diomedes refus’d his aid in war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unmov’d with presents, and as deaf to pray’r.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some new alliance must elsewhere be sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or peace with Troy on hard conditions bought.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Latinus, sunk in sorrow, finds too late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A foreign son is pointed out by fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, till Aeneas shall Lavinia wed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wrath of Heav’n is hov’ring o’er his head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gods, he saw, espous’d the juster side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When late their titles in the field were tried:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Witness the fresh laments, and fun’ral tears undried.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus, full of anxious thought, he summons all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Latian senate to the council hall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The princes come, commanded by their head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crowd the paths that to the palace lead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Supreme in pow’r, and reverenc’d for his years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He takes the throne, and in the midst appears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Majestically sad, he sits in state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bids his envoys their success relate.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>When Venulus began, the murmuring sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was hush’d, and sacred silence reign’d around.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“We have,” said he, “perform’d your high command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pass’d with peril a long tract of land:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We reach’d the place desir’d; with wonder fill’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Grecian tents and rising tow’rs beheld.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great Diomede has compass’d round with walls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The city, which Argyripa he calls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his own Argos nam’d. We touch’d, with joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The royal hand that raz’d unhappy Troy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When introduc’d, our presents first we bring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then crave an instant audience from the king.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His leave obtain’d, our native soil we name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tell th’ important cause for which we came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attentively he heard us, while we spoke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, with soft accents, and a pleasing look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made this return: ‘Ausonian race, of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Renown’d for peace, and for an age of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What madness has your alter’d minds possess’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To change for war hereditary rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Solicit arms unknown, and tempt the sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A needless ill your ancestors abhorr’d?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We—for myself I speak, and all the name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Grecians, who to Troy’s destruction came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Omitting those who were in battle slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or borne by rolling Simois to the main)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not one but suffer’d, and too dearly bought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The prize of honour which in arms he sought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some doom’d to death, and some in exile driv’n.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outcasts, abandon’d by the care of Heav’n;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So worn, so wretched, so despis’d a crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ev’n old Priam might with pity view.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Witness the vessels by Minerva toss’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In storms; the vengeful Capharean coast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ Euboean rocks! the prince, whose brother led</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our armies to revenge his injur’d bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Egypt lost! Ulysses with his men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have seen Charybdis and the Cyclops’ den.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should I name Idomeneus, in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Restor’d to scepters, and expell’d again?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or young Achilles, by his rival slain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ev’n he, the King of Men, the foremost name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the Greeks, and most renown’d by fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The proud revenger of another’s wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet by his own adult’ress lost his life;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fell at his threshold; and the spoils of Troy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The foul polluters of his bed enjoy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gods have envied me the sweets of life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My much lov’d country, and my more lov’d wife:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Banish’d from both, I mourn; while in the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transform’d to birds, my lost companions fly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hov’ring about the coasts, they make their moan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cuff the cliffs with pinions not their own.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What squalid spectres, in the dead of night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Break my short sleep, and skim before my sight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I might have promis’d to myself those harms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mad as I was, when I, with mortal arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presum’d against immortal pow’rs to move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And violate with wounds the Queen of Love.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such arms this hand shall never more employ;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No hate remains with me to ruin’d Troy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I war not with its dust; nor am I glad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To think of past events, or good or bad.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your presents I return: whate’er you bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To buy my friendship, send the Trojan king.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We met in fight; I know him, to my cost:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With what a whirling force his lance he toss’d!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heav’ns! what a spring was in his arm, to throw!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How high he held his shield, and rose at ev’ry blow!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had Troy produc’d two more his match in might,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They would have chang’d the fortune of the fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ invasion of the Greeks had been return’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our empire wasted, and our cities burn’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The long defence the Trojan people made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The war protracted, and the siege delay’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were due to Hector’s and this hero’s hand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both brave alike, and equal in command;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aeneas, not inferior in the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In pious reverence to the gods excell’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make peace, ye Latians, and avoid with care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ impending dangers of a fatal war.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said no more; but, with this cold excuse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Refus’d th’ alliance, and advis’d a truce.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Thus Venulus concluded his report.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A jarring murmur fill’d the factious court:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As, when a torrent rolls with rapid force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dashes o’er the stones that stop the course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flood, constrain’d within a scanty space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Roars horrible along th’ uneasy race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>White foam in gath’ring eddies floats around;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rocky shores rebellow to the sound.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The murmur ceas’d: then from his lofty throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The king invok’d the gods, and thus begun:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I wish, ye Latins, what we now debate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had been resolv’d before it was too late.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much better had it been for you and me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unforc’d by this our last necessity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To have been earlier wise, than now to call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A council, when the foe surrounds the wall.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O citizens, we wage unequal war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With men not only Heav’n’s peculiar care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Heav’n’s own race; unconquer’d in the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, conquer’d, yet unknowing how to yield.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What hopes you had in Diomedes, lay down:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our hopes must centre on ourselves alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet those how feeble, and, indeed, how vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You see too well; nor need my words explain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vanquish’d without resource; laid flat by fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Factions within, a foe without the gate!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not but I grant that all perform’d their parts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With manly force, and with undaunted hearts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With our united strength the war we wag’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With equal numbers, equal arms, engag’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You see th’ event.—Now hear what I propose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To save our friends, and satisfy our foes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tract of land the Latins have possess’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the Tiber, stretching to the west,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which now Rutulians and Auruncans till,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And their mix’d cattle graze the fruitful hill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those mountains fill’d with firs, that lower land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If you consent, the Trojan shall command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Call’d into part of what is ours; and there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On terms agreed, the common country share.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There let them build and settle, if they please;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless they choose once more to cross the seas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In search of seats remote from Italy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from unwelcome inmates set us free.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then twice ten galleys let us build with speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or twice as many more, if more they need.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Materials are at hand; a well-grown wood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Runs equal with the margin of the flood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let them the number and the form assign;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The care and cost of all the stores be mine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To treat the peace, a hundred senators</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall be commission’d hence with ample pow’rs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With olive the presents they shall bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A purple robe, a royal iv’ry chair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the marks of sway that Latian monarchs wear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sums of gold. Among yourselves debate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This great affair, and save the sinking state.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then Drances took the word, who grudg’d, long since,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rising glories of the Daunian prince.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Factious and rich, bold at the council board,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But cautious in the field, he shunn’d the sword;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A close caballer, and tongue-valiant lord.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Noble his mother was, and near the throne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, what his father’s parentage, unknown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rose, and took th’ advantage of the times,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To load young Turnus with invidious crimes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Such truths, O king,” said he, “your words contain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As strike the sense, and all replies are vain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor are your loyal subjects now to seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What common needs require, but fear to speak.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him give leave of speech, that haughty man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose pride this unauspicious war began;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For whose ambition (let me dare to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fear set apart, tho’ death is in my way)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The plains of Latium run with blood around.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So many valiant heroes bite the ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dejected grief in ev’ry face appears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A town in mourning, and a land in tears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While he, th’ undoubted author of our harms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The man who menaces the gods with arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, after all his boasts, forsook the fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sought his safety in ignoble flight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, best of kings, since you propose to send</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such bounteous presents to your Trojan friend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Add yet a greater at our joint request,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One which he values more than all the rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give him the fair Lavinia for his bride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With that alliance let the league be tied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for the bleeding land a lasting peace provide.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let insolence no longer awe the throne;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, with a father’s right, bestow your own.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For this maligner of the general good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If still we fear his force, he must be woo’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His haughty godhead we with pray’rs implore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your scepter to release, and our just rights restore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O cursed cause of all our ills, must we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wage wars unjust, and fall in fight, for thee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What right hast thou to rule the Latian state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And send us out to meet our certain fate?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis a destructive war: from Turnus’ hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our peace and public safety we demand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let the fair bride to the brave chief remain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If not, the peace, without the pledge, is vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turnus, I know you think me not your friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor will I much with your belief contend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I beg your greatness not to give the law</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In others’ realms, but, beaten, to withdraw.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pity your own, or pity our estate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor twist our fortunes with your sinking fate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your interest is, the war should never cease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But we have felt enough to wish the peace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A land exhausted to the last remains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Depopulated towns, and driven plains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, if desire of fame, and thirst of pow’r,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A beauteous princess, with a crown in dow’r,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So fire your mind, in arms assert your right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And meet your foe, who dares you to the fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mankind, it seems, is made for you alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We, but the slaves who mount you to the throne:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A base ignoble crowd, without a name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unwept, unworthy, of the fun’ral flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By duty bound to forfeit each his life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Turnus may possess a royal wife.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Permit not, mighty man, so mean a crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should share such triumphs, and detain from you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The post of honour, your undoubted due.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather alone your matchless force employ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To merit what alone you must enjoy.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>These words, so full of malice mix’d with art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inflam’d with rage the youthful hero’s heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, groaning from the bottom of his breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He heav’d for wind, and thus his wrath express’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“You, Drances, never want a stream of words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, when the public need requires our swords.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First in the council hall to steer the state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ever foremost in a tongue-debate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While our strong walls secure us from the foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere yet with blood our ditches overflow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let the potent orator declaim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with the brand of coward blot my name;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free leave is giv’n him, when his fatal hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has cover’d with more corps the sanguine strand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And high as mine his tow’ring trophies stand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If any doubt remains, who dares the most,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us decide it at the Trojan’s cost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And issue both abreast, where honour calls—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Foes are not far to seek without the walls)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless his noisy tongue can only fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And feet were giv’n him but to speed his flight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I beaten from the field? I forc’d away?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, but so known a dastard, dares to say?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had he but ev’n beheld the fight, his eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had witness’d for me what his tongue denies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What heaps of Trojans by this hand were slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how the bloody Tiber swell’d the main.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All saw, but he, th’ Arcadian troops retire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In scatter’d squadrons, and their prince expire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The giant brothers, in their camp, have found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I was not forc’d with ease to quit my ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not such the Trojans tried me, when, inclos’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I singly their united arms oppos’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First forc’d an entrance thro’ their thick array;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, glutted with their slaughter, freed my way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis a destructive war? So let it be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to the Phrygian pirate, and to thee!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime proceed to fill the people’s ears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With false reports, their minds with panic fears:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Extol the strength of a twice-conquer’d race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our foes encourage, and our friends debase.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Believe thy fables, and the Trojan town</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Triumphant stands; the Grecians are o’erthrown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suppliant at Hector’s feet Achilles lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Diomede from fierce Aeneas flies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say rapid Aufidus with awful dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Runs backward from the sea, and hides his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the great Trojan on his bank appears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For that’s as true as thy dissembled fears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of my revenge. Dismiss that vanity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou, Drances, art below a death from me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let that vile soul in that vile body rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lodging is well worthy of the guest.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Now, royal father, to the present state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of our affairs, and of this high debate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If in your arms thus early you diffide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And think your fortune is already tried;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If one defeat has brought us down so low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As never more in fields to meet the foe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then I conclude for peace: ’tis time to treat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lie like vassals at the victor’s feet.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, O! if any ancient blood remains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One drop of all our fathers’, in our veins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That man would I prefer before the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who dar’d his death with an undaunted breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who comely fell, by no dishonest wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shun that sight, and, dying, gnaw’d the ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, if we still have fresh recruits in store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If our confederates can afford us more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If the contended field we bravely fought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not a bloodless victory was bought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their losses equal’d ours; and, for their slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With equal fires they fill’d the shining plain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why thus, unforc’d, should we so tamely yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, ere the trumpet sounds, resign the field?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good unexpected, evils unforeseen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appear by turns, as fortune shifts the scene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some, rais’d aloft, come tumbling down amain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then fall so hard, they bound and rise again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Diomede refuse his aid to lend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The great Messapus yet remains our friend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tolumnius, who foretells events, is ours;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ Italian chiefs and princes join their pow’rs:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor least in number, nor in name the last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your own brave subjects have your cause embrac’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above the rest, the Volscian Amazon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Contains an army in herself alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heads a squadron, terrible to sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With glitt’ring shields, in brazen armour bright.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, if the foe a single fight demand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I alone the public peace withstand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If you consent, he shall not be refus’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor find a hand to victory unus’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This new Achilles, let him take the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fated armour, and Vulcanian shield!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For you, my royal father, and my fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I, Turnus, not the least of all my name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Devote my soul. He calls me hand to hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I alone will answer his demand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drances shall rest secure, and neither share</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The danger, nor divide the prize of war.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>While they debate, nor these nor those will yield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aeneas draws his forces to the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And moves his camp. The scouts with flying speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Return, and thro’ the frighted city spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ unpleasing news, the Trojans are descried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In battle marching by the river side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bending to the town. They take th’ alarm:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some tremble, some are bold; all in confusion arm.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ impetuous youth press forward to the field;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They clash the sword, and clatter on the shield:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fearful matrons raise a screaming cry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old feeble men with fainter groans reply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A jarring sound results, and mingles in the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like that of swans remurm’ring to the floods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or birds of diff’ring kinds in hollow woods.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Turnus th’ occasion takes, and cries aloud:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Talk on, ye quaint haranguers of the crowd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Declaim in praise of peace, when danger calls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the fierce foes in arms approach the walls.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said, and, turning short, with speedy pace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Casts back a scornful glance, and quits the place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thou, Volusus, the Volscian troops command</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mount; and lead thyself our Ardean band.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Messapus and Catillus, post your force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Along the fields, to charge the Trojan horse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some guard the passes, others man the wall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drawn up in arms, the rest attend my call.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>They swarm from ev’ry quarter of the town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with disorder’d haste the rampires crown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good old Latinus, when he saw, too late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gath’ring storm just breaking on the state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dismiss’d the council till a fitter time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And own’d his easy temper as his crime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, forc’d against his reason, had complied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To break the treaty for the promis’d bride.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Some help to sink new trenches; others aid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ram the stones, or raise the palisade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hoarse trumpets sound th’ alarm; around the walls</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Runs a distracted crew, whom their last labour calls.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sad procession in the streets is seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of matrons, that attend the mother queen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High in her chair she sits, and, at her side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With downcast eyes, appears the fatal bride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They mount the cliff, where Pallas’ temple stands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pray’rs in their mouths, and presents in their hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With censers first they fume the sacred shrine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then in this common supplication join:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O patroness of arms, unspotted maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Propitious hear, and lend thy Latins aid!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Break short the pirate’s lance; pronounce his fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lay the Phrygian low before the gate.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now Turnus arms for fight. His back and breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well-temper’d steel and scaly brass invest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cuishes which his brawny thighs infold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are mingled metal damask’d o’er with gold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His faithful falchion sits upon his side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor casque, nor crest, his manly features hide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, bare to view, amid surrounding friends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With godlike grace, he from the tow’r descends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exulting in his strength, he seems to dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His absent rival, and to promise war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Freed from his keepers, thus, with broken reins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wanton courser prances o’er the plains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in the pride of youth o’erleaps the mounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And snuffs the females in forbidden grounds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or seeks his wat’ring in the well-known flood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To quench his thirst, and cool his fiery blood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He swims luxuriant in the liquid plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And o’er his shoulder flows his waving mane:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He neighs, he snorts, he bears his head on high;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before his ample chest the frothy waters fly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Soon as the prince appears without the gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Volscians, with their virgin leader, wait</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His last commands. Then, with a graceful mien,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lights from her lofty steed the warrior queen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her squadron imitates, and each descends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose common suit Camilla thus commends:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If sense of honour, if a soul secure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of inborn worth, that can all tests endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can promise aught, or on itself rely</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Greatly to dare, to conquer or to die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, I alone, sustain’d by these, will meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Tyrrhene troops, and promise their defeat.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ours be the danger, ours the sole renown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You, gen’ral, stay behind, and guard the town.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Turnus a while stood mute, with glad surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on the fierce Virago fix’d his eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then thus return’d: “O grace of Italy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With what becoming thanks can I reply?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not only words lie lab’ring in my breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thought itself is by thy praise oppress’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet rob me not of all; but let me join</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My toils, my hazard, and my fame, with thine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Trojan, not in stratagem unskill’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sends his light horse before to scour the field:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself, thro’ steep ascents and thorny brakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A larger compass to the city takes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This news my scouts confirm, and I prepare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To foil his cunning, and his force to dare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With chosen foot his passage to forelay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And place an ambush in the winding way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou, with thy Volscians, face the Tuscan horse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brave Messapus shall thy troops enforce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With those of Tibur, and the Latian band,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Subjected all to thy supreme command.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This said, he warns Messapus to the war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then ev’ry chief exhorts with equal care.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All thus encourag’d, his own troops he joins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hastes to prosecute his deep designs.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Inclos’d with hills, a winding valley lies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By nature form’d for fraud, and fitted for surprise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A narrow track, by human steps untrode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leads, thro’ perplexing thorns, to this obscure abode.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High o’er the vale a steepy mountain stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence the surveying sight the nether ground commands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The top is level, an offensive seat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of war; and from the war a safe retreat:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, on the right and left, is room to press</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The foes at hand, or from afar distress;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To drive ’em headlong downward, and to pour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On their descending backs a stony show’r.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thither young Turnus took the well-known way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Possess’d the pass, and in blind ambush lay.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Meantime Latonian Phoebe, from the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beheld th’ approaching war with hateful eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And call’d the light-foot Opis to her aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her most belov’d and ever-trusty maid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then with a sigh began: “Camilla goes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To meet her death amidst her fatal foes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The nymphs I lov’d of all my mortal train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Invested with Diana’s arms, in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor is my kindness for the virgin new:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas born with her; and with her years it grew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her father Metabus, when forc’d away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From old Privernum, for tyrannic sway,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Snatch’d up, and sav’d from his prevailing foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This tender babe, companion of his woes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Casmilla was her mother; but he drown’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One hissing letter in a softer sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And call’d Camilla. Thro’ the woods he flies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wrapp’d in his robe the royal infant lies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His foes in sight, he mends his weary pace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With shout and clamours they pursue the chase.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The banks of Amasene at length he gains:</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The raging flood his farther flight restrains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rais’d o’er the borders with unusual rains.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prepar’d to plunge into the stream, he fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not for himself, but for the charge he bears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anxious, he stops a while, and thinks in haste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, desp’rate in distress, resolves at last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A knotty lance of well-boil’d oak he bore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The middle part with cork he cover’d o’er:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He clos’d the child within the hollow space;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With twigs of bending osier bound the case;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then pois’d the spear, heavy with human weight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus invok’d my favour for the freight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Accept, great goddess of the woods,’ he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘Sent by her sire, this dedicated maid!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thro’ air she flies a suppliant to thy shrine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the first weapons that she knows, are thine.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said; and with full force the spear he threw:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above the sounding waves Camilla flew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, press’d by foes, he stemm’d the stormy tide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gain’d, by stress of arms, the farther side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His fasten’d spear he pull’d from out the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, victor of his vows, his infant nymph unbound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor, after that, in towns which walls inclose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would trust his hunted life amidst his foes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, rough, in open air he chose to lie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earth was his couch, his cov’ring was the sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On hills unshorn, or in a desert den,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shunn’d the dire society of men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shepherd’s solitary life he led;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His daughter with the milk of mares he fed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dugs of bears, and ev’ry salvage beast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He drew, and thro’ her lips the liquor press’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little Amazon could scarcely go:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He loads her with a quiver and a bow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, that she might her stagg’ring steps command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He with a slender jav’lin fills her hand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her flowing hair no golden fillet bound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor swept her trailing robe the dusty ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instead of these, a tiger’s hide o’erspread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her back and shoulders, fasten’d to her head.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The flying dart she first attempts to fling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And round her tender temples toss’d the sling;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, as her strength with years increas’d, began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pierce aloft in air the soaring swan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the clouds to fetch the heron and the crane.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Tuscan matrons with each other vied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bless their rival sons with such a bride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she disdains their love, to share with me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sylvan shades and vow’d virginity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, O! I wish, contented with my cares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of salvage spoils, she had not sought the wars!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then had she been of my celestial train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shunn’d the fate that dooms her to be slain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But since, opposing Heav’n’s decree, she goes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find her death among forbidden foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haste with these arms, and take thy steepy flight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, with the gods, averse, the Latins fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This bow to thee, this quiver I bequeath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This chosen arrow, to revenge her death:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By whate’er hand Camilla shall be slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or of the Trojan or Italian train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him not pass unpunish’d from the plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, in a hollow cloud, myself will aid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bear the breathless body of my maid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unspoil’d shall be her arms, and unprofan’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her holy limbs with any human hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in a marble tomb laid in her native land.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She said. The faithful nymph descends from high</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With rapid flight, and cuts the sounding sky:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Black clouds and stormy winds around her body fly.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>By this, the Trojan and the Tuscan horse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drawn up in squadrons, with united force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Approach the walls: the sprightly coursers bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Press forward on their bits, and shift their ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shields, arms, and spears flash horribly from far;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the fields glitter with a waving war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oppos’d to these, come on with furious force</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Messapus, Coras, and the Latian horse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These in the body plac’d, on either hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sustain’d and clos’d by fair Camilla’s band.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Advancing in a line, they couch their spears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And less and less the middle space appears.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thick smoke obscures the field; and scarce are seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The neighing coursers, and the shouting men.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In distance of their darts they stop their course;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then man to man they rush, and horse to horse.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The face of heav’n their flying jav’lins hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deaths unseen are dealt on either side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tyrrhenus, and Aconteus, void of fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By mettled coursers borne in full career,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meet first oppos’d; and, with a mighty shock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their horses’ heads against each other knock.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from his steed is fierce Aconteus cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As with an engine’s force, or lightning’s blast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rolls along in blood, and breathes his last.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Latin squadrons take a sudden fright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sling their shields behind, to save their backs in flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spurring at speed to their own walls they drew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Close in the rear the Tuscan troops pursue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And urge their flight: Asylas leads the chase;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till, seiz’d, with shame, they wheel about and face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receive their foes, and raise a threat’ning cry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Tuscans take their turn to fear and fly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So swelling surges, with a thund’ring roar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Driv’n on each other’s backs, insult the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bound o’er the rocks, incroach upon the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And far upon the beach eject the sand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then backward, with a swing, they take their way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Repuls’d from upper ground, and seek their mother sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With equal hurry quit th’ invaded shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swallow back the sand and stones they spew’d before.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Twice were the Tuscans masters of the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Twice by the Latins, in their turn, repell’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Asham’d at length, to the third charge they ran;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both hosts resolv’d, and mingled man to man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now dying groans are heard; the fields are strow’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With falling bodies, and are drunk with blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arms, horses, men, on heaps together lie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confus’d the fight, and more confus’d the cry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Orsilochus, who durst not press too near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strong Remulus, at distance drove his spear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stuck the steel beneath his horse’s ear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fiery steed, impatient of the wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Curvets, and, springing upward with a bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His helpless lord cast backward on the ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Catillus pierc’d Iolas first; then drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His reeking lance, and at Herminius threw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mighty champion of the Tuscan crew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His neck and throat unarm’d, his head was bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But shaded with a length of yellow hair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Secure, he fought, expos’d on ev’ry part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A spacious mark for swords, and for the flying dart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Across the shoulders came the feather’d wound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transfix’d he fell, and doubled to the ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sands with streaming blood are sanguine dyed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And death with honour sought on either side.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Resistless thro’ the war Camilla rode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In danger unappall’d, and pleas’d with blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One side was bare for her exerted breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One shoulder with her painted quiver press’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now from afar her fatal jav’lins play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now with her ax’s edge she hews her way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Diana’s arms upon her shoulder sound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when, too closely press’d, she quits the ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From her bent bow she sends a backward wound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her maids, in martial pomp, on either side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Larina, Tulla, fierce Tarpeia, ride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Italians all; in peace, their queen’s delight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In war, the bold companions of the fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So march’d the Tracian Amazons of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Thermodon with bloody billows roll’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such troops as these in shining arms were seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Theseus met in fight their maiden queen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such to the field Penthisilea led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the fierce virgin when the Grecians fled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such, return’d triumphant from the war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her maids with cries attend the lofty car;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They clash with manly force their moony shields;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With female shouts resound the Phrygian fields.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Who foremost, and who last, heroic maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the cold earth were by thy courage laid?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy spear, of mountain ash, Eumenius first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fury driv’n, from side to side transpierc’d:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A purple stream came spouting from the wound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bath’d in his blood he lies, and bites the ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Liris and Pegasus at once she slew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The former, as the slacken’d reins he drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his faint steed; the latter, as he stretch’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His arm to prop his friend, the jav’lin reach’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the same weapon, sent from the same hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both fall together, and both spurn the sand.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amastrus next is added to the slain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest in rout she follows o’er the plain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tereus, Harpalycus, Demophoon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Chromis, at full speed her fury shun.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all her deadly darts, not one she lost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each was attended with a Trojan ghost.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young Ornithus bestrode a hunter steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift for the chase, and of Apulian breed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him from afar she spied, in arms unknown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er his broad back an ox’s hide was thrown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His helm a wolf, whose gaping jaws were spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cov’ring for his cheeks, and grinn’d around his head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He clench’d within his hand an iron prong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tower’d above the rest, conspicuous in the throng.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him soon she singled from the flying train,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slew with ease; then thus insults the slain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Vain hunter, didst thou think thro’ woods to chase</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The savage herd, a vile and trembling race?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here cease thy vaunts, and own my victory:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A woman warrior was too strong for thee.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, if the ghosts demand the conqu’ror’s name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confessing great Camilla, save thy shame.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Butes and Orsilochus she slew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bulkiest bodies of the Trojan crew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Butes breast to breast: the spear descends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above the gorget, where his helmet ends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And o’er the shield which his left side defends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Orsilochus and she their courses ply:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He seems to follow, and she seems to fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in a narrower ring she makes the race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then he flies, and she pursues the chase.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gath’ring at length on her deluded foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She swings her ax, and rises to the blow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full on the helm behind, with such a sway</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The weapon falls, the riven steel gives way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He groans, he roars, he sues in vain for grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brains, mingled with his blood, besmear his face.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Astonish’d Aunus just arrives by chance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see his fall; nor farther dares advance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, fixing on the horrid maid his eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stares, and shakes, and finds it vain to fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, like a true Ligurian, born to cheat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(At least while fortune favour’d his deceit,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cries out aloud: “What courage have you shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who trust your courser’s strength, and not your own?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forego the vantage of your horse, alight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then on equal terms begin the fight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It shall be seen, weak woman, what you can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, foot to foot, you combat with a man,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He said. She glows with anger and disdain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dismounts with speed to dare him on the plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And leaves her horse at large among her train;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With her drawn sword defies him to the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, marching, lifts aloft her maiden shield.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The youth, who thought his cunning did succeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reins round his horse, and urges all his speed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adds the remembrance of the spur, and hides</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goring rowels in his bleeding sides.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Vain fool, and coward!” cries the lofty maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Caught in the train which thou thyself hast laid!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On others practice thy Ligurian arts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thin stratagems and tricks of little hearts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are lost on me: nor shalt thou safe retire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With vaunting lies, to thy fallacious sire.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At this, so fast her flying feet she sped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That soon she strain’d beyond his horse’s head:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then turning short, at once she seiz’d the rein,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And laid the boaster grov’ling on the plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not with more ease the falcon, from above,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trusses in middle air the trembling dove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then plumes the prey, in her strong pounces bound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The feathers, foul with blood, come tumbling to the ground.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now mighty Jove, from his superior height,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his broad eye surveys th’ unequal fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He fires the breast of Tarchon with disdain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sends him to redeem th’ abandon’d plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betwixt the broken ranks the Tuscan rides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And these encourages, and those he chides;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Recalls each leader, by his name, from flight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Renews their ardour, and restores the fight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What panic fear has seiz’d your souls? O shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O brand perpetual of th’ Etrurian name!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cowards incurable, a woman’s hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drives, breaks, and scatters your ignoble band!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now cast away the sword, and quit the shield!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What use of weapons which you dare not wield?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not thus you fly your female foes by night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor shun the feast, when the full bowls invite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When to fat off’rings the glad augur calls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the shrill hornpipe sounds to bacchanals.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These are your studied cares, your lewd delight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swift to debauch, but slow to manly fight.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus having said, he spurs amid the foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not managing the life he meant to lose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first he found he seiz’d with headlong haste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his strong gripe, and clasp’d around the waist;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas Venulus, whom from his horse he tore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, laid athwart his own, in triumph bore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Loud shouts ensue; the Latins turn their eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And view th’ unusual sight with vast surprise.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fiery Tarchon, flying o’er the plains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Press’d in his arms the pond’rous prey sustains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, with his shorten’d spear, explores around</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His jointed arms, to fix a deadly wound.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor less the captive struggles for his life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He writhes his body to prolong the strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, fencing for his naked throat, exerts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His utmost vigour, and the point averts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So stoops the yellow eagle from on high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bears a speckled serpent thro’ the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fast’ning his crooked talons on the prey:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pris’ner hisses thro’ the liquid way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resists the royal hawk; and, tho’ oppress’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fights in volumes, and erects her crest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn’d to her foe, she stiffens ev’ry scale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shoots her forky tongue, and whisks her threat’ning tail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the victor, all defence is weak:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ imperial bird still plies her with his beak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He tears her bowels, and her breast he gores;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then claps his pinions, and securely soars.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus, thro’ the midst of circling enemies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strong Tarchon snatch’d and bore away his prize.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Tyrrhene troops, that shrunk before, now press</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Latins, and presume the like success.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Then Aruns, doom’d to death, his arts assay’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To murder, unespied, the Volscian maid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This way and that his winding course he bends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, whereso’er she turns, her steps attends.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When she retires victorious from the chase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wheels about with care, and shifts his place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, rushing on, she seeks her foes in fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He keeps aloof, but keeps her still in sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He threats, and trembles, trying ev’ry way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unseen to kill, and safely to betray.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chloreus, the priest of Cybele, from far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glitt’ring in Phrygian arms amidst the war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was by the virgin view’d. The steed he press’d</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was proud with trappings, and his brawny chest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With scales of gilded brass was cover’d o’er;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A robe of Tyrian dye the rider wore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With deadly wounds he gall’d the distant foe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gnossian his shafts, and Lycian was his bow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A golden helm his front and head surrounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gilded quiver from his shoulder sounds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gold, weav’d with linen, on his thighs he wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With flowers of needlework distinguish’d o’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With golden buckles bound, and gather’d up before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him the fierce maid beheld with ardent eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fond and ambitious of so rich a prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or that the temple might his trophies hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else to shine herself in Trojan gold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blind in her haste, she chases him alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seeks his life, regardless of her own.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>This lucky moment the sly traitor chose:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, starting from his ambush, up he rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And threw, but first to Heav’n address’d his vows:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“O patron of Socrates’ high abodes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Phoebus, the ruling pow’r among the gods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom first we serve, whole woods of unctuous pine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are fell’d for thee, and to thy glory shine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thee protected with our naked soles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thro’ flames unsing’d we march, and tread the kindled coals</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give me, propitious pow’r, to wash away</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stains of this dishonourable day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor spoils, nor triumph, from the fact I claim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with my future actions trust my fame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let me, by stealth, this female plague o’ercome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from the field return inglorious home.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apollo heard, and, granting half his pray’r,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shuffled in winds the rest, and toss’d in empty air.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gives the death desir’d; his safe return</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By southern tempests to the seas is borne.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Now, when the jav’lin whizz’d along the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both armies on Camilla turn’d their eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Directed by the sound. Of either host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ unhappy virgin, tho’ concern’d the most,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was only deaf; so greedy was she bent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On golden spoils, and on her prey intent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till in her pap the winged weapon stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Infix’d, and deeply drunk the purple blood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her sad attendants hasten to sustain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their dying lady, drooping on the plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far from their sight the trembling Aruns flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With beating heart, and fear confus’d with joys;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor dares he farther to pursue his blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or ev’n to bear the sight of his expiring foe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As, when the wolf has torn a bullock’s hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At unawares, or ranch’d a shepherd’s side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conscious of his audacious deed, he flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And claps his quiv’ring tail between his thighs:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, speeding once, the wretch no more attends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, spurring forward, herds among his friends.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She wrench’d the jav’lin with her dying hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wedg’d within her breast the weapon stands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wood she draws, the steely point remains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She staggers in her seat with agonizing pains:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(A gath’ring mist o’erclouds her cheerful eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from her cheeks the rosy colour flies:)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then turns to her, whom of her female train</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She trusted most, and thus she speaks with pain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Acca, ’tis past! he swims before my sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inexorable Death; and claims his right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bear my last words to Turnus; fly with speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bid him timely to my charge succeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Repel the Trojans, and the town relieve:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Farewell! and in this kiss my parting breath receive.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She said, and, sliding, sunk upon the plain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dying, her open’d hand forsakes the rein;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Short, and more short, she pants; by slow degrees</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her mind the passage from her body frees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She drops her sword; she nods her plumy crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her drooping head declining on her breast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the last sigh her struggling soul expires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, murm’ring with disdain, to Stygian sounds retires.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A shout, that struck the golden stars, ensued;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despair and rage the languish’d fight renew’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Trojan troops and Tuscans, in a line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Advance to charge; the mix’d Arcadians join.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>But Cynthia’s maid, high seated, from afar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surveys the field, and fortune of the war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unmov’d a while, till, prostrate on the plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Welt’ring in blood, she sees Camilla slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, round her corpse, of friends and foes a fighting train.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, from the bottom of her breast, she drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mournful sigh, and these sad words ensue:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Too dear a fine, ah, much lamented maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For warring with the Trojans, thou hast paid!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor aught avail’d, in this unhappy strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Diana’s sacred arms, to save thy life.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet unreveng’d thy goddess will not leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her vot’ry’s death, nor; with vain sorrow grieve.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Branded the wretch, and be his name abhorr’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But after ages shall thy praise record.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ inglorious coward soon shall press the plain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus vows thy queen, and thus the Fates ordain.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>High o’er the field there stood a hilly mound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sacred the place, and spread with oaks around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where, in a marble tomb, Dercennus lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A king that once in Latium bore the sway.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The beauteous Opis thither bent her flight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To mark the traitor Aruns from the height.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him in refulgent arms she soon espied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swoln with success; and loudly thus she cried:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thy backward steps, vain boaster, are too late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn like a man, at length, and meet thy fate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charg’d with my message, to Camilla go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And say I sent thee to the shades below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An honour undeserv’d from Cynthia’s bow.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>She said, and from her quiver chose with speed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The winged shaft, predestin’d for the deed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to the stubborn yew her strength applied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till the far distant horns approach’d on either side.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bowstring touch’d her breast, so strong she drew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whizzing in air the fatal arrow flew.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At once the twanging bow and sounding dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The traitor heard, and felt the point within his heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him, beating with his heels in pangs of death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His flying friends to foreign fields bequeath.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The conqu’ring damsel, with expanded wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The welcome message to her mistress brings.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Their leader lost, the Volscians quit the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, unsustain’d, the chiefs of Turnus yield.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The frighted soldiers, when their captains fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More on their speed than on their strength rely.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confus’d in flight, they bear each other down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spur their horses headlong to the town.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Driv’n by their foes, and to their fears resign’d,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not once they turn, but take their wounds behind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These drop the shield, and those the lance forego,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or on their shoulders bear the slacken’d bow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hoofs of horses, with a rattling sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beat short and thick, and shake the rotten ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Black clouds of dust come rolling in the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And o’er the darken’d walls and rampires fly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The trembling matrons, from their lofty stands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rend heav’n with female shrieks, and wring their hands.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All pressing on, pursuers and pursued,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are crush’d in crowds, a mingled multitude.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some happy few escape: the throng too late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rush on for entrance, till they choke the gate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ev’n in the sight of home, the wretched sire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looks on, and sees his helpless son expire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then, in a fright, the folding gates they close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But leave their friends excluded with their foes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The vanquish’d cry; the victors loudly shout;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis terror all within, and slaughter all without.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blind in their fear, they bounce against the wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, to the moats pursued, precipitate their fall.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>The Latian virgins, valiant with despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arm’d on the tow’rs, the common danger share:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much of zeal their country’s cause inspir’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much Camilla’s great example fir’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poles, sharpen’d in the flames, from high they throw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With imitated darts, to gall the foe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their lives for godlike freedom they bequeath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And crowd each other to be first in death.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime to Turnus, ambush’d in the shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With heavy tidings came th’ unhappy maid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The Volscians overthrown, Camilla kill’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The foes, entirely masters of the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a resistless flood, come rolling on:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cry goes off the plain, and thickens to the town.”</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Inflam’d with rage, (for so the Furies fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Daunian’s breast, and so the Fates require,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He leaves the hilly pass, the woods in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Possess’d, and downward issues on the plain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scarce was he gone, when to the straits, now freed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From secret foes, the Trojan troops succeed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thro’ the black forest and the ferny brake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unknowingly secure, their way they take;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the rough mountains to the plain descend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there, in order drawn, their line extend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both armies now in open fields are seen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor far the distance of the space between.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both to the city bend. Aeneas sees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thro’ smoking fields, his hast’ning enemies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Turnus views the Trojans in array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hears th’ approaching horses proudly neigh.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soon had their hosts in bloody battle join’d;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But westward to the sea the sun declin’d.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Intrench’d before the town both armies lie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While night with sable wings involves the sky.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
